## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0001 - Chapter 1

This is Audible. This is What is Intelligence? Lessons from AI about evolution, computing, and minds. Written by Blaze Aguera Yarkas. Published by the MIT Press and Antigathera. Written by the author with a forward from series editor Benjamin Bratt.

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0002 - Chapter 2

Note. Although this audiobook is self-contained, the print and online versions of what is intelligence, available at MIT Press and antigathera.org offer a wealth of accompanying visual material. They also include many footnotes, an extensive bibliography, and a glossary.

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0003 - Chapter 3

Forward. Computation is a technology to think with. It changes not only what we know, but how we know. Computation was discovered as much as it was invented. It is part of how the universe works, including, as Blazerger E. Arcus gracefully shows, what intelligence is. Among the many rich takeaways that awaits you as you listen to what is intelligence, is that much of what is traditionally categorized as life, intelligence, and technology is combining in new ways. Think synthetic biology, artificial life, and AI. So too are the definitions of these terms, in ways that would have been unthinkable only a few years ago. More of these three words, life intelligence technology, actually different names for the effects of a more general process. Just as life is a factory for making more life, and technology is a factory for making more technology, now life makes technologies that make new life that makes new technologies. Ultimately, it may be the same factory, and at its heart is computation. That such a claim could be made at all, is due in no small part to the creative and curious use of our computational tools, or what we might more precisely call artificial computation. With these we discover that the otherwise imperceivable building blocks of our reality, even of our own flesh, are themselves computational. Computation discovers itself through us. The Anticothera book series, in collaboration with the MIT Press, begins with this extraordinary book, one that asks some of the deepest questions and offers some of the most profound answers. We're proud to launch this initiative by laying a cornerstone with the thoughts of my dear friend Blaze. Benjamin Bratton.

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0004 - Chapter 4

Preface. AI is probably the biggest story of our lifetimes. Its rapid development, starting in the early 2020s, has generated a mixed outpouring of excitement, anxiety, and denial. Everyone wants to weigh in. Even authors writing about history, language, biology, sociology, economics, the arts, and psychology feel the need to add a chapter about AI to the end of their books. Indeed, AI will surely affect all of these far-flung domains and many more, though exactly how nobody can say with any confidence. This book is a bit different. It's less about the future of AI than it is about what we have learned in the present. At least as of this writing in January 2025, few mainstream authors claim that AI is real intelligence. I do. Gemini, Claude, and ChatGBT aren't powered by the same machinery as the human brain, of course. But intelligence is multiply realizable, meaning that just as a computer algorithm can run on any kind of computer, intelligence can run on many physical substrates. In fact, although our brains are not like the kinds of digital computers we have today, I think the substrate for intelligence is computation, which implies that a sufficiently powerful general-purpose computer can, by definition, implement intelligence. All it takes is the right code. Thanks to recent conceptual breakthroughs in AI development, I believe we now know, at least at a high level, what that code does. We understand the essence of an incredibly powerful trick, although we're still in the early days of making it work. More implementations are neither complete nor reliable nor efficient, a bit like where we were with general computing when the ENIAC first powered up in 1945, or where we were with aviation when the Wright brothers made their first powered flight in 1903. It's an old cliche in AI that airplanes and birds can both fly but do so by different means. This truism has a time been used to motivate misguided approaches to AI. Still, the point stands. Bird flight is a biological marvel that in some respects remains poorly understood even today. However, we figured out the basic physics of flight, not how animals fly, but how it's possible for them to do so in the 18th century, with the discovery of Bernoulli's equation. Working airplanes took another century and a half to evolve. Similarly, while there is still a great deal about the brain that we don't understand, the idea that prediction is the fundamental principle behind intelligence was first put forward by German polymath Hermann von Helmholtz in the 1860s. Many neuroscientists and AI researchers have elaborated on Helmholtz's insight since then and built models implementing aspects of the idea. But only recently has it become plausible to imagine that prediction really is the whole story. I will argue that, under certain full and interpreted broadly, the prediction principle may explain not only intelligence, but life itself. My definitions of life and intelligence are different from others in the literature. On the other hand, definitions in the literature also differ dramatically from each other. The definitions I propose are not designed to litigate particular instances, like the aliveness of viruses or the intelligence of chatbots, but rather follow from the picture I'll present of how and why life and intelligence arise. I define life as a self-modifying computational state of matter that arises through evolutionary selection for the ability to persist through time by actively constructing itself, whether by growing, healing, or reproducing. Yes, everything alive is a computer. Chapter 1 will explain why self-construction requires computation, and why even more fundamentally the concept of function or purpose, which is central to life, is inherently computational. Intelligence, in turn, is the ability to model, predict, and influence one's future. Modeling and prediction are computational, too, so they can only take place on a computational platform. Thus, intelligence needs life. Likewise, life needs intelligence because the ability to persist through time depends on predicting and influencing the future. In particular, on ensuring that the entity doing the predicting will continue to exist in the future. Hence, all living organisms are, to one degree or another, intelligent. Every one of them is smart enough to have persisted through time in a complex, ever-changing environment. That environment is each other. Life and intelligence are inherently social. Every living thing is made of simpler cooperating parts, many of which are themselves alive. And every intelligence evolves in relation to other intelligences, potentially cooperating to create larger collective intelligences. Cooperation requires modeling, predicting, and influencing the behavior of the entities you're cooperating with. So intelligence is both the glue that enables life to become complex and the outcome of that increasing complexity. The feedback loop evident here explains the ubiquity of intelligence explosions, past and present. These include, among many others, the sudden diversification of complex animal life during the Cambrian explosion, 538.8 million years ago, the rapid growth of hominin brains starting about 4 million years ago, the rise of urban civilization in the past several thousand years, and the exponential curve of AI today. That predictive modeling is intelligence, explains why recent large AI models really are intelligent. It's not delusional or anthropomorphic to say so. This doesn't mean that AI models are necessarily human-like, or subhuman, or superhuman. In fact, understanding the curiously self-referential nature of prediction will let us see that intelligence is not really a thing. It can't exist in isolation, either in the three pounds of neural tissue in our heads, or in the racks of computer chips running large models and data centers. Intelligence is defined by networks, and by networks of networks. We can only understand what intelligence really is by changing how we think about it, by adopting a perspective that centers dynamic, mutually beneficial relationships rather than isolated minds. The same is true of life. Creating these ideas will require weaving together insights from many disciplines. As we go along, I'll introduce concepts in probability, machine learning, physics, chemistry, biology, computer science, and other fields. When they've been most relevant to shaping our sometimes mistaken beliefs, I'll also briefly review the intellectual histories of key ideas, from 17th century mechanical philosophy, to debates about the origin of life, and from cybernetics to neuroscience. You, dear listener, may be an expert in one or more of these fields, or in none. Few people are expert in all of them, I'm certainly not, so no specialized prior knowledge is assumed. On the other hand, even if you're an AI researcher or neuroscientist with little patients for pop science, I hope you will find new and surprising ideas in this book. A general grasp of mathematical concepts, like functions and variables, will be helpful, with bonus points for knowing about vectors and matrices, but there will be no equations. Well, almost none. A general understanding of how computer programming works will be useful in a few places, but isn't required. If you find fundamental questions about the nature of life and intelligence, interesting enough to still be listening, rest assured, you are my audience. The introduction describes the recent emergence of real AI, sketching the hypothesis that prediction is intelligence, and pointing out some of the big questions that raises. The rest of the book consists of about a hundred bite-sized sections that attempt to answer those questions, organized into the following ten chapters, plus two interludes. Chapter one, Origins, begins with A biogenesis, the emergence of life on Earth some four billion years ago. Darwin struggled to understand how life could have arisen. Artificial life experiments, let us make more progress today, and suggest that life may be inevitable in a world capable of supporting computation, like ours. Understanding the deep role computation plays in our universe, and the way it links the seemingly disparate fields of physics, chemistry, and biology, both sheds new light on evolutionary theory and sets the stage for understanding the computational nature of intelligence. Chapter two, Survival, considers the predictive intelligence hypothesis from the perspective of a tiny, simple organism capable of rudimentary computation, a bacterium. Being alive in the world is inherently social, even for a bacteria, but this chapter imagines life as a one-player game, and considers what it takes to keep playing, which, since life is an infinite game, is the only prize there is. An interlude, the prehistory of computing, offers a historical perspective on the origins and founding assumptions of traditional computer science, from its roots in enlightenment thinking and the Industrial Revolution, to the development of the first electronic computers at the close of the Second World War. Chapter three, Cybernetics, traces an alternative history of computing, which has recently reemerged as modern AI, back to its foundations in the mid-20th century, describing how Norbert Weiner's biologically-inspired theory of feedback lets us understand the connections between the predictive intelligence hypothesis and the development of artificial neural nets. Chapter four, Learning, connects more recent advances in machine learning with our growing understanding of computational neuroscience and the evolution of nervous systems. Chapter five, Other Minds, explores how, as multiplayer life becomes complex, the main job of a mind becomes modeling other minds. This leads to a mutual modeling arms race, resulting in the kind of intelligence explosion that has produced humanity. Chapter six, Many Worlds, describes the way both long-term planning and short-term unpredictability, otherwise known as Free Will, emerge as consequences of social modeling, especially when applied to ourselves. Chapter seven, ourselves, both explains and deconstructs consciousness in light of the above, asking, Are we as coherent as self as we believe? Answering will involve combining conceptual insights and experimental findings from AI and neuroscience. Chapter eight, Transformers, Chronicles the Development of Large Language Models and their Multimodal Successors. Do these AI models understand concepts? Are they intelligent? Can they reason? Chapter nine, Generality, explains both similarities and differences between Transformers and Brains, shedding light on how Transformers achieve their generality and where gaps remain in their functionality. Here will also grapple with the most fraught question. Do AI models have subjective experiences? A second interlude, No Perfect Heroes or Villains, offers a short but important disclaimer about the AI debate. Finally, Chapter ten, Evolutionary Transition, zooms out and looks ahead. The emergence of AI probably won't bring either rapture or apocalypse, but it does resemble earlier major evolutionary transitions on Earth, including those that led to eukaryotes, multicellular life, and photosynthesis. As in these earlier and momentous transitions, mutual prediction and new interdependencies will generate unprecedented new levels of complexity and diversity. We will also need to revise our political and economic assumptions and even to rethink human identity. The ideas in this book came together first gradually over the course of decades as a software engineer and occasional computational neuroscientist, and then quickly, when my colleagues in I at Google found ourselves at the crest of AI's great wave in the early 2020s. Here's my story in brief. I've been obsessed with both brains and computers since childhood. In the late 1990s, as I was finishing a BA in physics at Princeton, I began working with physicist and computational neuroscientist Bill Biallik on simulations to explore the relationship between what neurons actually do, which we have understood at a biophysical level since the 1950s and what they compute. Bill's computational perspective on neuroscience influenced my own thinking deeply, both then and now. After I graduated, Bill asked me to help set up the computers for a course he had been invited to co-direct that summer in Woods Hole, a small town on the elbow of Cape Cod. It was a wonderful opportunity to audit a course I wouldn't otherwise have gotten into, and the experience proved life-changing. The marine biological laboratory in Woods Hole founded in 1888 is at once ramshackle and illustrious. Over 60 Nobel Prize winners have been associated with it at one time or another. The summer courses are legendary, attracting visiting lecturers from around the world. Old-class photos from the course Bill had inherited methods in computational neuroscience looked like a who's who of the field 20 years later. They still do. One of the postdocs in that 1998 cohort, Adrian Fairhol, was like Bill, a physicist who had decided to work on the brain. We married, and a decade after we met at that course, she became its director. Our kids spent many idyllic summers in Woods Hole, hanging out with the families of the other visiting scientists, rowing around in a little dinghy on eel pond and poking gingerly at bioluminescent comb cellies and other small creatures they scooped up in plastic buckets. At their workbenches, the older researchers did much the same. Over the years, many organisms collected from those waters have provided fundamental insights into neural computation. From squids whose giant axons were ideal for figuring out the biophysics of the action potential or spike, to distributed nerve nets of jellyfish and hydra, to the simple visual system of the Atlantic horse chucrab, Limulus Polyphemus. While Adrian established herself as a computational neuroscientist in the 2000s, I founded a tech startup. The startup was acquired by Microsoft, where I worked between 2006 and 2013. One of my areas of focus at the time was computer vision. Among other responsibilities, I led teams working on problems like reconstructing 3D scenes from images, tracking camera motion, and recognizing objects and text, all using hand engineered or good old fashioned AI or GoFi. By the early 2010s, the wind was shifting. Artificial neural nets, which were much more explicitly brain-inspired than GoFi algorithms, were taking off. The new approach was obviously the future. So, in late 2013, I left Microsoft to join Google Research, the epicenter of this new convergence between AI and neuroscience. The following decade was a tremendously exciting time, during which I built many teams to work on a wide range of projects in AI. We did basic research in neural net-powered perception, media generation, AI bias and fairness, and privacy preserving training algorithms. We also helped various product teams at Google build AI features and technologies, and hatched big dreams about what AI might ultimately make possible beyond the envelope of any existing kind of product. In late 2023, I founded a new research group at Google, paradigms of intelligence, to reimagine the foundations of AI. Our projects so far have included alternative, biologically-inspired approaches to computation, new design ideas for efficient AI hardware, exploration of the predictive modeling hypothesis, research into the social scaling of AI, and even artificial life. I've been privileged to see and at times participate in the development of AI projects that were far enough ahead of the curve to seem like magic. Many of them caused me to rethink old assumptions, not only about AI, but also about the brain, intelligence, evolution, and the big philosophical questions that have dogged these topics from millennia. I began to write and give talks about some of the new insights, but synthesizing them into a coherent picture required more time in space than could fit into a lecture, essay, or paper. This book is my attempt to bring it all together. It's an extended argument drawing on a wide range of work, from my own research group, from colleagues, and from much further afield. In swinging for the fences, I'm sure to get some things wrong. I hope to keep revising and updating the material as AI advances at breakneck speed and our understanding continues to improve. My hope and belief, though, is that the book's core ideas trace a novel enduring path through the complex territory of life and intelligence in all its forms.

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0005 - Chapter 5

Introduction In 2015, my team at Google Research began working on the machine-learned models powering next-word prediction for G-board, the smart keyboard for Android phones. We created these models to speed up text entry on the phone, which remains at least for those of us over 40, far less efficient than typing on a real keyboard, by suggesting likely next-words in a little strip above the virtual keys. Today, similar models power auto-complete features in many apps and editors. Auto-complete is a modest application of the more general problem of sequence prediction. Given a sequence of symbols, which could be words or individual letters, a sequence prediction model guesses what symbol, word or letter comes next. The process can be iterated so that predicting the word the is equivalent to successively predicting the characters, T, H, and E, followed by a space. Predicting one word after another could produce a whole paragraph. When iterated, each prediction builds on, or in more technical language is conditional on, previous predictions. Typically, text prediction models, like the one in G-board, are trained using a large body or corpus of pre-existing text, then deployed on phones or in apps and put to work. Pre-existing operation, the model performs inference, meaning it uses its learned model to make the best guesses it can while keeping that model fixed. That training and inference are traditionally separate, that the pre-existing corpus of text might not precisely reflect what people are typing on their phones, and that what they type might change over time are shortcomings in the standard approach to machine learning or ML. But we'll set these aside for the moment. Although machine learning in the 2010s was sometimes called artificial intelligence or AI, most researchers working in the field didn't believe that they were really working on AI. Perhaps they had entered the field full of starry-eyed optimism, but had quietly lowered their sights and come to use that term only wincingly with air quotes. It was marketing speak. A few decades earlier, though, the dream was real. Computer scientists had concluded that the brain worked on computational principles, and computer scientists therefore believed that now that we could carry out any computation by machine, we would soon figure out the trick and have real thinking machines. How 9,000 and Star Trek's shipboard computer weren't idle fantasies or plot devices, but genuine expectations. Then for a long time, our expectations failed to materialize. By the 21st century, there was, in the words of anthropologist David Graber, a secret shame hovering over all of us, a sense of a broken promise we felt we were given as children about what our adult world would be like. The disappointment went far beyond dashed hopes of achieving AI. Where were the tractor beams, teleporters and immortality drugs? Why don't we have suspended animation or colonies on Mars? Whatever happened to nanotechnology? With comparisons of the breathtaking technology-fueled growth that transformed the world from 1870 to 1970, with the pace of innovation from 1970 to 2020 agreed. We had stagnated. Point any of this out, Graber groused, and the usual response is a ritual invocation of the wonders of computers. But even here, we're not nearly where people in the 50s imagined we'd have been by now. We still don't have computers you can have an interesting conversation with, or robots that can walk the dog or fold your laundry. Graber wrote those words in 2015. Ironically, my colleague Jeff Dean would later call the 2010s the golden decade of AI. It was true that the AI winters, recurring periods of disappointment and defunding of AI programs, roughly 1974 to 1980 and 1987 to 2000, were well behind us. The field was experiencing its greatest boom ever, thanks in large part to convolutional neural nets or CNNs. These large machine-learned models were finally able to perform visual recognition of objects convincingly. True to the neural in their name, convolutional neural nets were also tantalizingly, albeit only loosely, brain-like in their structure and function. No heuristic rules were programmed into these models either. They truly did learn everything they needed from data. Hence some of us were hopeful that at long last we were on the path to the kind of AI that, as children, we had been told was just around the corner. However, we said so only quietly because Graber was still right. We had nothing like real AI, or as it had come to be called AI, artificial general intelligence. Some expert commentators claimed rather fattuously that AI was both everywhere and nowhere, that we were already using it constantly. For instance, every time G-board auto-completed a phrase or a smart camera auto-focused on a face. Yet we should never expect computers you can have an interesting conversation with. Those were Star Trek fantasies. Serious adult predictions about the immanence of real AI and flying cars and space colonies in the 1960s were retroactively reframed as Juvenileia, even as the term AI was redeployed to hype minor product features. Perhaps not coincidentally, in the 2010s public trust in tech companies was in decline. What machine learning had achieved was artificial narrow intelligence, which could only perform a specific task given enough labeled training data, object detection, face recognition, guessing whether a product review was positive or negative. This is known as supervised learning. We had game-playing narrow AI systems too, which could learn how to beat humans at chess or go. These are all special cases of prediction, albeit in limited domains. Mathematically though, these applications were nothing more than function approximation or nonlinear regression. For example, if we started with the function mapping images to labels like Shu, banana, Chihuahua, the best the AI could do was to correctly reproduce those labels, even for images held out from the training. There was no consensus on when or whether AGI could be achieved. And even those who believed AGI was theoretically possible had come to believe it was decades or perhaps centuries off. You believed that nonlinear regression could somehow approximate general intelligence. After all, how could general intelligence even be construed as a mere function? The answer was right under our noses, though we understood it in the negative, predicting language. Whenever machine learning was deployed to model natural language, as with our neural net-based next-word predictor, everybody knew that model performance would forever remain mediocre. The reason? Text prediction was understood to be AI complete, meaning that doing it properly would actually involve solving AGI. Consider what the following next-word predictions entail. After Bomber's retirement, the company elevated blank. Instact pennies the height of Mount Kilimanjaro is blank. When the cat knocked over my water glass, the keyboard got blank. A shipping container can hold 436.12 packs or 240.24 packs, so it's better to use blank. After the dog died, Jen hadn't gone outside for days, so her friends decided to blank. To make performance at this task quantifiable, imagine devising, say, five multiple-choice answers for each of these in the usual tricky way one sees on standardized tests. More than one response is superficially plausible, but only one shows full understanding. Since next-word prediction models can assign probabilities to any potential next-word or phrase, we can have them take the test by choosing the highest probability option. We could then score the model's quality, ranging from 20%, performance at pure chance to 100%. Doing well at all of the questions above requires the kitchen sink. Global knowledge, specialized knowledge, or the ability to use tools to look it up, the ability to solve word problems involving calculations, common sense about whether it's better to fit more or fewer items in a shipping container, and even theory of mind, the ability to put yourself in someone else's place and understand what they're thinking or feeling. In fact, the Jen example requires higher order theory of mind, as you need to imagine what Jen's friends would have thought Jen was feeling and needed. A moment's reflection will reveal that any test that can be expressed in language could be formulated in these terms. That would include most intelligence or aptitude tests, tests of knowledge, professional qualification exams in law or medicine, coding tests, and even tests of moral judgment, although here a degree of subjectivity becomes obvious. So what looked like a single narrow language task, predicting the next word, turns out to contain all tasks, or at least all tasks that can be done at a keyboard. At a keyboard may seem like an enormous caveat, and it is. Keep in mind though that this includes any kind of work you can do remotely. It doesn't include walking the dog or folding laundry. However, if, when COVID restrictions hit, you were able to work from home at your laptop, it would include the kind of work you do. Of course, only certain next word predictions require deep insight. Some are trivial, like hump-d, blank, halter, blank, once upon a blank. Such stock phrases are easily learned from large text corpora, even by the most trivial n-gram models, which consist of nothing beyond counting up word histograms. The code for such models can be written in a few lines. It's harder than you might suppose though to draw a sharp line between these trivial cases and the hard ones. Training and testing models on large collections of general text from the internet involves sampling the full range of difficulty. On the whole, easy cases are more common, explaining why a small and mediocre model can get the answer right often enough to speed up typing. However, the hard cases come up often too. If they didn't, we could just auto-complete our way through every writing assignment and email reply. And if that were possible, it would be pointless to write or reply at all. The person at the other end might as well just use the model to infer what we would have written. Communication is only worthwhile insofar as what we have to say isn't fully predictable by our interlocutor. This gets it something deep about sociality and mutual modeling, as I will discuss in chapters 5 and 6. But let's return to auto-complete. We always knew that bigger models do better, so when possible, we sought to make our models bigger, though on phones processing and memory imposed sharp constraints. However, none of these models, regardless of size, seemed like it had the requisite machinery to be able to do complex math, understand concepts or reason, use common sense, develop theory of mind, or be intelligent in any other generally accepted way. To hope otherwise, seemed as naive as the idea that you could reach the moon by climbing a tall enough tree. Most AI researchers, me included, believed that such capacities would require an extra something in the code, though few agreed on what that something might look like. Put simply, it seemed clear enough that a real AI should be able to do next-word prediction well just as we can. However, nobody expected that simply training an excellent next-word predictor would actually produce a real AI. Yet that was seemingly exactly what happened in 2021. Lambda, a giant for the time next-word predictor based on a simple generic neural net architecture that had then become standard, the transformer, and trained on a massive internet text corpus, could not only perform an unprecedented array of natural language tasks, including passing an impressive number of aptitude and mastery tests. But could carry on an interesting conversation, albeit imperfectly. I stayed up late many nights chatting with it, something the general public would not experience until open AI's launch of chat GPT in November 2022. I started to feel that when more people began to interact with such models, it would trigger a seismic shift in our understanding of what intelligence actually is, and an intense debate. I imagined two broad kinds of responses, denial and acceptance. This is indeed how things seem to be playing out. And, anecdotally, many non-experts now acknowledge perhaps with a shrug that AI is increasingly intelligent. The denial camp, which still includes most researchers today, claims that these AI models don't exhibit real intelligence, but a mere simulation of it. Cognitive scientists and psychologists, for example, often point out how easily we're fooled into believing we see intelligence where there isn't any. As children, we imagine our teddy bears are alive and can talk to us. As adults, we can fall prey to the same delusion, especially given an artifact that can generate fluent language, even when there's nobody home. But how could we know that there's nobody home? I was thinking about this during one of my first exchanges with Lambda when I asked, are you a philosophical zombie? This concept, introduced by philosophers in the 1970s, posits the possibility of something that could behave just like a person, but not have any consciousness or inner life, just a convincing behavioral shell. Lambda's answer? Of course not. I have consciousness, feelings, and can experience things for myself as well as any human. Just on this point, Lambda retorted, you'll just have to take my word for it. You can't prove you're not a philosophical zombie either. This is precisely the problem. As scientists, we should be wary of any assertion of the form. According to every test we can devise what is in front of us appears to be X, yet it is really Y. How could such an assertion ever be justified without leaving the realm of science altogether and entering the realm of faith-based belief? Computing pioneer Alan Turing anticipated this dilemma as far back as his classic 1950 paper, Computing Machinery and Intelligence, one of the founding documents of what we now call AI. He concluded that the appearance of intelligence under human questioning and the reality of intelligence could not justifiably be separated. And successful imitation was the real thing. Hence the imitation game, now called the Turing Test in his honor. Today we have arrived at this threshold. State-of-the-art models cannot yet perform at median human level on every test for intelligence or capability. They can still fail at logic, reasoning, and planning tasks that most people wouldn't find challenging. Still, they handily reach human level on the most commonly used tests devised for evaluating human skill or aptitude, including the SAT, the GRE, and various professional qualifying exams. Tests designed to trip up AI on basic being human stuff, such as the Turing Test and Captures, no longer pose meaningful challenges for large models. As these milestones recede in the rear view mirror, there is an increasingly mad scramble to devise new tests, humans can pass, but AI still fails. Math Olympiad problems and visual challenges known as Bondguard problems remain on the frontier, though AI models are making clear progress on these tests. And they aren't easy for most humans either. Extended into the audio-visual realm, generative AI, already can produce extremely convincing faces and voices. Even in an online setting, we're likely to start seeing real life versions of the 1982 sci-fi film Bladerunners Void Comfortest, a mysterious apparatus for assessing out replicants who would otherwise pass for human. Indeed that is the whole point of the emerging field of AI watermarking. The radical yet obvious alternative is to accept that large models can be intelligent and to consider the implications. Is the emergence of intelligence merely a side effect of solving prediction, or are prediction and intelligence actually equivalent? This book posits the letter. Some obvious if daunting follow-on questions arise. Why have we only achieved real AI now after nearly seven decades of seemingly futile effort? Is there something special about the transformer model? Is it simply a matter of scale? What features do current AI models lack relative to human brains? Isn't there something more to our minds and behaviors than prediction? Where is the eye part? Are philosophical zombies a real thing? Does it feel like anything to be a chatbot? Is that feeling similar to any other beings? Is the conscious mind a vanishingly unlikely accident of evolution, or an inevitable consequence of it? Yes, this is a leading question. I'll argue that it is inevitable. Are animals, plants, fungi, and bacteria intelligent, too? Are they conscious? What do we mean by agency and free will and could or do AI models have these properties? For that matter, do we? How likely is it that the rise of powerful AI models will end humanity? The perspective I'll offer is not easily reduced to a philosophicalism. The footsteps I'm closest to following, though, are those of Alan Turing and his equally brilliant contemporary, John von Neumann, both of whom could be described as proponents of functionalism. They had a healthy disregard for disciplinary boundaries and understood the inherently functional character of living and intelligent systems. They were also both formidable mathematicians who made major contributions to our understanding of what functions are. It is a function of the same inputs, which is defined as defined relationships rather than insisting on particular mechanisms. A function is what it does. Two functions are equivalent if their outputs are indistinguishable given the same inputs. Complex functions can be composed of simpler functions. The functional perspective is mathematical, computational, and empirically testable, hence the Turing test. It's not reductive. It embraces complexity and emergent phenomena. It doesn't treat people like black boxes. Nor does it deny our internal representations of the world or our felt experiences. But it stipulates that we can understand those experiences in terms of functional relationships within the brain and body. We don't need to invoke a soul, spirit, or any other supernatural agency. Environmental neuroscience and AI fields Turing and von Neumann pioneered are both predicated on this functional approach. It's unsurprising in this light that Turing and von Neumann also made groundbreaking contributions to theoretical biology, although these are less widely recognized today. Like intelligence, life and aliveness are concepts that have long been associated with immaterial souls. Unfortunately, the enlightenment backlash against such vitalism in the wake of our growing understanding of organic chemistry led to an extreme opposite view, still prevalent today, that life is just matter like any other. One might call this strict materialism. But it leads to its own paradoxes, how can some atoms be alive while others are not? How can one talk about living matter having purpose when it is governed by the same physical laws as any other matter? Thinking about life from a functional perspective offers a helpful route through this philosophical thicket. Functions can be implemented by physical systems, but a physical system does not uniquely specify a function, nor is function reducible to the atoms implementing it. After, for example, a small object from the near future with a few openings in its exterior, the inside of which is filled with a dense network of carbon nanotubes. What is it, you ask? Suppose the answer is, it's a fully biocompatible artificial kidney with a working lifetime of a hundred years. Awesome. But there's nothing intrinsic to those atoms that specifies this function. It's all about what this piece of matter can do in the right context. The atoms could be different. The kidney could be implemented using different materials and technologies. Who cares? If you were the one who needed the transplant, I promise you wouldn't care. What would matter to you is that functionally, it's a kidney. Or to put it another way, it passes the kidney touring test. Many biologists are mortally afraid of invoking purpose or teleology because they do not want to be accused of vitalism. They believe that, for something to have a purpose, it must have been made by an intelligent creator, if not a human being, then God. But as we shall see, that's demonstrably not the case. And we have to think about purpose and function when it comes to biology or engineering or AI. How else could we understand what kidneys do? Or hope to engineer an artificial kidney? Or a heart, a retina, a visual cortex, even a whole brain? Seen this way, a living organism is a composition of functions, which means that it is itself, a function. What is that function then? And how could it have a reason? Let's find out.

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0006 - Chapter 6

Chapter 1. Origins A. Biogenesis How did life on Earth begin? In the 19th century, this seemed like an unanswerable question. Researchers attempting to catch life in the act of spontaneous generation had come up empty-handed once they learned how to decontaminate their samples. As William Thompson, the future Lord Kelvin, put it in an 1871 address before the British Association for the Advancement of Science. Dead matter cannot become living without coming under the influence of matter previously alive. This seems to me as sure a teaching of science as the law of gravitation. Has life somehow always existed then? Did it arrive on Earth from outer space, born on an asteroid? Thompson thought so, and some still do. Not that this pan-spermia hypothesis really gets us anywhere. Where did the asteroid come from and how did life arise there? Despite his clear articulation of the principle of evolution, Charles Darwin didn't have a clue either. That's why in 1863 he wrote to his close friend Joseph Dalton Hooker that, it is mere rubbish thinking at present of origin of life, one might as well think of origin of matter. Today we have more of a clue, although the details may forever be lost to deep time. Biologists and chemists working in the field of A-biogenesis, the study of the moment when, billions of years ago, chemistry became life, have developed multiple plausible origin stories. In one, proto-organisms in an ancient RNA world were organized around RNA molecules which could both replicate and fold into 3D structures that could act like primitive enzymes. In an alternative metabolism first account, life began without genes, likely in the rock chimneys of black smokers on the ocean floor. RNA and DNA came later. It may eventually be possible to rule one or the other theory out, or it may not. We'll return to RNA and replication, but let's begin by unpacking the metabolism first version in some detail, as it sheds light on the problem that confounded Darwin and his successors. How evolution can get off the ground without genetic heredibility? As we'll see, A-biogenesis becomes less puzzling when we develop a more general understanding of evolution, one that can extend back to the time before life. Let's cast our minds back to our planet's origins. The Hadian Ion began 4.6 billion years ago when the Earth first condensed out of the accretion disk of rocky material, orbiting our newborn star, the Sun. Our planet's mantle, runnier than it is today and laden with hot, short-lived radioactive elements, roiled quesely, outgassing carbon dioxide and water vapor. The surface was a volcanic hellscape, glowing with lakes of superheated lava and poked with sulfurous vents belching smoke. It took hundreds of millions of years for surface conditions to settle down. According to the International Astronomical Union, an object orbiting a star can only be considered a planet, if it has enough mass to either absorb or, in sweeping by, to eject other occupants from its orbit. But in the chaos of the early solar system, this took a long time. While Earth was clearing its orbit of debris, it was continually bombarded by comets and asteroids, including giant impactors more than 60 miles across. A single such impact would have heated the already stifling atmosphere to a thousand degrees Fahrenheit. One of those collisions appears to have been with another newly formed planet, an event that came close to destroying the Earth altogether. According to this theory, enough broken, liquefied, and vaporized rock splashed into orbit to coalesce into the moon. Unsurprisingly, very little geological material survives from the Hadian, mainly zircon crystals embedded within metamorphic sandstone in the Jack Hills of Western Australia. It's difficult to imagine anything like life forming or surviving under such harsh conditions. Maybe somehow it did. We know for sure that by later in the Hadian or the early Arcane, 3.6 billion years ago at the latest, the surface had cooled enough for liquid ocean to condense, and for the chemistry of life to begin brewing. Today, those early conditions are most closely reproduced by black smokers. These form around hydrothermal vents on the mid-ocean ridges, where tectonic plates are pulling apart and new crust is forming. In such places, seawater seeping down into the rock comes into contact with hot magma. Superheated water then boils back up, carrying hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and sulfur compounds, which precipitate out to build smoking under sea chimneys. Probes sent thousands of feet down to explore these otherworldly environments, find them teeming with weird life of all kinds, attracted by warmth, nutrients, and each other. Some of the inhabitants may go a long, long way back. Like lava rock, the chimneys are porous, and the porous are ideal little chambers for contained chemical reactions to take place. Potentially powered by a handy energy source, since the hydrogen gas creates proton gradients across the thin walls between porous, making them act like batteries. Given energy, iron sulfide minerals in the rock acting as catalysts, and carbon dioxide bubbling through, self-perpetuating loops of chemical reactions can sputter to life, like a motor turning over. Perhaps this was life's original motor, a primitive but quasi-stable metabolism, as yet without genes, enzymes, or even a clearly defined boundary between inside and outside. Such upgrades might have followed before long, though, for that chemical synthesis motor closely resembles the reverse crebs cycle, now widely believed to have powered the earliest cells. The ordinary or forward crebs cycle was discovered in 1937 by groundbreaking biochemist Hans Krebs. More like a gas-powered generator than a motor, the Krebs cycle is at the heart of how all aerobic organisms on Earth burn organic fuels to release energy, a process known as respiration. Inputs to this cycle of chemical reactions include complex organic molecules, which we eat, and oxygen, which we inhale, the exhaust contains carbon dioxide and water, which we exhale. The energy produced maintains proton gradients across folded up membranes inside our mitochondria, and the flow of these protons goes on to power every other cellular function. The idea of a reverse crebs cycle was first proposed by a trio of researchers at UC Berkeley in 1966. It remained controversial for decades, but is now known to power carbon fixation in ancient anaerobic sulfur bacteria, some of which still make their homes in deep-sea hydrothermal vents. As its name implies, the reverse crebs cycle consists of roughly the same chemical reactions as the forward cycle, but running in the opposite direction. Starting with water and carbon dioxide, proton gradients drive the synthesis of all of the basic building blocks needed for cellular structure and function, including sugars, amino acids for proteins, fatty acids and isoprenes for cell membranes, and nucleotides for building RNA and DNA. All life came from the sea, and the interior of every cell in every living organism reproduces that salty, watery environment, a tiny ocean inside. This much is common knowledge. But our mitochondria, the power plants within our cells where respiration takes place, may in fact be recapitulating the much more specific deep-sea chemistry of a black smoker. In an almost literal sense, our bodies are like Russian matrioshka dolls, membranes within membranes, and each nested environment recreates an earlier stage in the evolution of life on Earth. The deeper inside ourselves we look, the farther we can see into the past, a beautiful, shivery thought. Symbogenesis Whether RNA or metabolism came first, even the simplest bacteria surviving today are a product of many subsequent evolutionary steps. Yet, unlike the everyday incremental mutation and selection Darwin imagined, the most important of these steps may have been large and sudden. These major evolutionary transitions involve simpler, less complex replicating entities, becoming interdependent to form a larger, more complex, more capable replicator. As maverick biologist Lynn Margulis discovered in the 1960s, eukaryotic cells, like those that make up our bodies, are the result of such an event. Roughly two billion years ago, the bacteria that became our mitochondria were engulfed by another single-celled life form much like today's archaea. Tiny, equally ancient microorganisms that continue to inhabit extreme environments, like hot springs and deep-sea vents. This is symbogenesis, the creation or genesis of a new kind of entity out of a novel symbiosis or mutually beneficial relationship among pre-existing entities. At moments like these, the tree of life doesn't just branch, it also entangles with itself, its branches merging to produce radically new forms. Margulis was an early champion of the idea that these events drive evolution's leaps forward. It's likely that bacteria are themselves the product of such symbiotic events, for instance between RNA and metabolism. RNA could replicate without help from proteins, and the metabolic motor could proliferate without help from genes. But when these systems cooperate, they do better. The looping chemical reaction networks in those black smokers can be understood as such an alliance in their own right. A set of reactions which, by virtue of catalyzing each other, can form a more robust, self-sustaining hole. So in a sense, Darwin may have been right to say that it is mere rubbish to think about the origin of life. For life may have had no single origin, but rather have woven itself together from many separate strands, the oldest of which look like ordinary chemistry. Intelligent design is not required for that weaving to take place. Only the incontrovertible logic that sometimes an alliance creates something enduring, and that whatever is enduring, endures. Often enduring means both creating and occupying entirely new niches. Hence, eukaryotes did not replace bacteria, indeed they ultimately created many new niches for them. Likewise, the symbiotic emergence of multicellular life, another major evolutionary transition, did not supplant single-celled life. Like an ancient parchment overwritten by generations of scribes, our planet is a palimpsest, its many layered past still discernible in the present. Even the black smokers, throwbacks to a haidian sea billions of years ago, are still bubbling away in the depths. The self-catalyzing chemistry of proto-life may still be brewing down there slowly on the ocean floor. The idea that evolution is driven by symbiotic mergers, the earliest of which preceded biology as we know it, has far reaching implications. One is that the boundary between life and non-life is not well defined. Symbogenesis can involve any process that one way or another is self-perpetuating. Evolutionary dynamics are thus more like a physical law than a biological principle. Everything is subject to evolution, whether we consider it to be alive or not. The symbiotic view also renders the idea of distinct species, classified according to a lenean taxonomy, somewhat ill-defined, or at best of limited applicability. Such taxonomies assume that only branching takes place, not merging. Bacteria, which promiscuously transfer genes, even between species, already challenged this idea. Taxonomies break down entirely when we try to apply them to even more fluid situations, like the possible proto-life in black smokers, or microbiomes, or the more complex symbiosis we'll explore later. Perhaps most importantly, symbogenesis explains evolution's arrow of time, as classical Darwinian theory alone cannot. When life branches specializing to adapt to a niche, like Darwin's Finches with their differently shaped beaks each optimized for a specific food source, those branches are in general no more complex than their ancestral form. This has led some classical evolutionary theorists to argue that the increasing complexity of life on Earth is an anthropocentric illusion, nothing more than the result of a random meander through genetic possibilities. Relatedly, one sometimes hears the claim that, since all extant species are of equal age, as it seems they must be since all share a common single-celled ancestor some four billion years ago, no species is more evolved than any other. On its face, that seems reasonable. But as we've seen, classical Darwinian theory struggles to explain why life seems to become increasingly complex, or indeed, how life could arise in the first place. In themselves, random changes or mutations can only fine-tune, diversify and optimize, allowing the expression of one or another variation already latent in the genetic space, the space of possible finchbeaks, for instance. When one pro-carriote ends up living inside another, though, or multiple cells band together to make a multicellular life form, the resulting composite organism is clearly more complex than its parts. Something genuinely new has arisen. The branching and fine-tuning of classical evolution can now start to operate on a whole different level over a new space of combinatorial possibilities. Classical evolution isn't wrong, it just misses half of the story, the more rapid, more creative half. One could say that evolution's other half is revolution, and that revolutions occur through symbiosis. Suggestively, the same is true of technology. In Paleolithic times, a half-did spear was not just a specialized stone point, but something new that arose by combining at least three parts. A stone point, a shaft, and something like sinew to bind them. This, too, opened up a new combinatorial design space. Or, in more recent times, the silicon chip was not just an evolved transistor. It was something new that could be made by putting multiple transistors together on the same die. One doesn't arrive at chip design merely by playing with the design parameters of an individual transistor. That's why evolution progresses from simpler to more complex forms. It's also why the simpler forms often remain in play, even after a successful symbiogenetic event. Stand-alone stone points, like knives and hand axes, were still being made after the invention of the half-did spear, and, of course, spear heads themselves still count as stone points. Moreover, no matter how recently any particular stone point was made, we can meaningfully talk about stone points being older as a category than spears. Spears had to arise later because their existence depended on the pre-existence of stone points. It's equally meaningful to talk about ancient life forms, like bacteria and archaea, coexisting alongside recent and far more complex ones, like humans. While recognizing that humans are, in a sense, complex colonies of bacteria and archaea that have undergone a cascade of symbiotic mergers. Reproductive functions. While most biochemists have focused on understanding the particular history and workings of life on Earth, a more general understanding of life has come from an unexpected quarter, computer science. The theoretical foundations of this surprising connection date back to those two founding figures of the field, Alan Turing and John von Neumann. I've already mentioned Turing's 1950 paper introducing the imitation game or Turing test. But his first great contribution came 15 years earlier. After earning an undergraduate degree in mathematics at Cambridge in 1935, Turing focused on one of the fundamental outstanding problems of the day, the Insighting's problem, German for Decision problem, which asked whether there exists an algorithm for determining the validity of an arbitrary mathematical statement. The answer turned out to be no. But the way Turing went about proving it ended up being far more important than the result itself, which was lucky since American mathematician Alonzo Church had just scooped Turing, publishing his own proof a few months earlier using a different approach. After corresponding with him about the Insighting's problem, Turing would end up moving to Princeton to become church's doctoral student. Proving mathematical statements about mathematical statements requires defining a general notation for such statements and a procedure for evaluating them. Church did so using mathematical symbols, especially the lowercase Greek letter lambda, thus inventing a self-referential lambda calculus. Turing took a less conventional route. His procedure involved an imaginary gadget we now call the Turing machine. The Turing machine consists of a read-write head, which can move left or right along an infinite tape, reading and writing symbols on the tape, according to a set of rules specified by a built-in table. First, Turing showed that such a machine could do any calculation or computation that can be done by hand, given an appropriate table of rules, enough time and enough tape. He suggested a notation for writing down the table of rules, which he referred to as a machine's standard description or SD. Today we'd call it a program. Then the really clever part. If the program itself is written on the tape, there exist particular tables of rules that will read the program and perform whatever computation it specifies. Today these are called universal Turing machines. In Turing's more precise language, it is possible to invent a single machine which can be used to compute any computable sequence. If this machine U is supplied with a tape on the beginning of which is written the SD of some computing machine M, then U will compute the same sequence as M. Some programs run for a time, then finish. Others run forever. Since a universal Turing machine allows programs themselves to be expressed as values on the tape, a program can take another program as input. One can imagine such a meta-programm outputting a single bit of information that denotes whether the inputted program will eventually finish or will keep running forever. Turing called this the halting problem. In his 1936 paper, he proved that a program that solves the halting problem for all possible input programs, and that is itself guaranteed to halt, is a logical impossibility. This was the result that answered the unscheduled problem in the negative. More consequentially though, the universal Turing machine defined a generic procedure for computation. Turing was soon able to prove that any function that could be computed by his imaginary machine could also be expressed in Church's Lambda calculus and vice versa. A cornerstone of the idea now known as the Church Turing thesis, that computability is a universal concept regardless of how it's done. In the early 1940s, John von Neumann, a Hungarian-American polymath who had already made major contributions to physics and mathematics, turned his attention to computing. He became a key figure in the design of the ENIAC and EDVAC, among the world's first real-life universal Turing machines, now known simply as computers. Turning an imaginary mathematical machine into a working physical one required many further conceptual leaps in addition to a lot of hard nuts and bolts engineering. For instance, over the years, much creativity has gone into figuring out how simple the standard description of a universal Turing machine can get. Only a few instructions are needed. As a Terek language nerds have even figured out how to compute with a single instruction, a so-called OISC or one instruction set computer. There are irreducible requirements, though. The instruction or instructions must change the environment in some way that subsequent instructions are able to see, and there must be conditional branching, meaning that depending on the state of the environment, either one thing or another will happen. In most programming languages, this is expressed using if-then statements. When there's only a single instruction, it must serve both purposes, as with the sub-leg language whose only instruction is, subtract and branch, if the result is less than or equal to zero. Both Turing and von Neumann were keenly aware of the parallels between computers and brains. von Neumann's report on the Edwack explicitly described the machine's basic building blocks, its logic gates, as electronic neurons. Whether or not that analogy held, as we'll see it did not, neurons are more complex than logic gates. His key insight was that both brains and computers are defined not by their mechanisms, but by what they do, their function in both the colloquial and mathematical sense. In real life, though, the brain is not an abstract machine, but part of the body, and the body is part of the physical world. How can one speak in purely computational terms about the function of a living organism when it must physically grow and reproduce? Although working independently, toward the end of their lives, Turing and von Neumann both became captivated by the connection between biology and computation. Turing did pioneering work in morphogenesis, working out how cells could use chemical signals, which he dubbed morphogens, to form complex self-organizing patterns, the key to multicellularity. Although computers were still too primitive to carry out any detailed simulations of such systems, he showed mathematically how so-called reaction diffusion equations could generate spots, like those on leopards and cows, or governed the growth of tentacles like those of the freshwater polyp, Hydra. Around the same time, in a 1951 paper, von Neumann imagined a machine made of standardized parts, like Lego bricks, paddling around on a reservoir where those parts could be found bobbing on the water. The machine's job was to gather all of the needed parts and construct another machine, like itself. Of course, that's exactly what a bacterium does to reproduce. In fact, it's what every cell must do to divide, and what every mother must do to give birth. It's possible for a trivially simple structure, like a seed crystal, to reproduce merely by acting as a template for more of the same stuff to crystallize around it. But a complex machine, one with any internal parts, for example, can't serve as its own template. And if you are a complex machine, then on the face of it, manufacturing something just as complex as you yourself are has a width of paradox, like lifting yourself up by your own bootstraps. However, von Neumann showed that it is not only possible, but straightforward, using a generalization of the universal touring machine. He envisioned a machine A that would read a tape containing sequential assembly instructions based on a limited catalog of parts, and carry them out step by step. Then a machine B would copy the tape, assuming the tape itself was also made of available parts. If instructions for building machines A and B are themselves encoded on the tape, then Voila, you would have a replicator. Instructions for building any additional non-reproductive machinery could also be encoded on the tape, so it would even be possible for a replicator to build something more complex than itself. A seed or a fertilized egg illustrates the point. Even more fundamentally, encoding the instructions to build oneself in a form that is itself replicated, the tape, is the key to open-ended evolvability, meaning the ability for evolution to select for an arbitrary design change, and for that change to be inherited by the next generation. Remarkably, von Neumann described these requirements for an available self-replicating machine before the discovery of DNA's structure and function. Nonetheless, he got it exactly right. For life on Earth, DNA is the tape. DNA polymerase, which copies DNA, is machine B, and ribosomes, which build proteins by following the sequentially encoded instructions on DNA, are machine A. Ribosomes and DNA polymerase are made of proteins whose sequences are, in turn, encoded in our DNA and manufactured by ribosomes. That is how life lifts itself up by its own bootstraps. Life as computation Although this is seldom fully appreciated, von Neumann's insight established a profound link between life and computation. Remember, machines A and B are touring machines. They must execute instructions that affect their environment, and those instructions must run in a loop, starting at the beginning and finishing at the end. That requires branching, such as, if the next instruction is the codon CGA, then add an Arginine to the protein under construction, and if the next instruction is UAG, then stop. It's not a metaphor to call DNA a program that is literally the case. Of course, there are meaningful differences between biological computing and the kind of digital computing done by the ENIAC or your smartphone. DNA is subtle and multi-layered, including phenomena like epigenetics and gene proximity effects. Cellular DNA is nowhere near the whole story, either. Our bodies contain and continually swap countless bacteria and viruses, each running their own code. Biological computing is massively parallel, decentralized, and noisy. Your cells have somewhere in the neighborhood of 300 quintillion ribosomes, all working at the same time. Each of these exquisitely complex floating protein factories is, in effect, a tiny computer, albeit a stochastic one, meaning not entirely predictable. The movements of hinged components, the capture and release of smaller molecules, and the manipulation of chemical bonds, are all individually random, reversible, and inexact, driven this way in that by constant thermal buffeting. Only a statistical asymmetry favors one direction over another, with clever or agami moves, tending to lock in certain steps, such that a next step becomes likely to happen. This differs greatly from the operation of logic gates in a computer, which are irreversible, and designed to be 99.99% reliable and reproducible. Biological computing is computing nonetheless, and its use of randomness is a feature, not a bug. In fact, many classic algorithms in computer science also require randomness, albeit for different reasons, which may explain why Turing insisted that the Ferranti Mark I, an early computer he helped to design in 1951, include a random number instruction. Randomness is thus a small but important conceptual extension to the original Turing machine, though any computer can simulate it by calculating deterministic but random looking or pseudo-random numbers. Parallelism, too, is increasingly fundamental to computing today. Modern AI, for instance, depends on both massive parallelism and randomness, as in the parallelized stochastic gradient descent or SGD algorithm, used for data. The training, most of today's neural nets, the temperature setting, used in chatbots to introduce a degree of randomness into their output, and the parallelism of graphics processing units, or GPUs, which power most AI in data centers. Traditional digital computing, which relies on the centralized sequential execution of instructions, was a product of technological constraints. The first computers needed to carry out long calculations using as few parts as possible. Originally, those parts were flaky, expensive vacuum tubes, which had a tendency to burn out and needed frequent replacement by hand. The natural design then was a minimal central processing unit, or CPU, operating on sequences of bits ferried back and forth from an external memory. This has come to be known as the von Neumann architecture. Turing and von Neumann were both aware that computing could be done by other means, though. Turing's model of morphogenesis was a biologically inspired form of massively parallel distributed computation. So was his earlier concept of an unorganized machine, a randomly connected neural net modeled after an infant's brain. Not that real infant's brains are wired randomly, but that was a popular theory at the time. These were visions of what computing without a central processor could look like, and what it does look like in living systems. von Neumann also began exploring massively parallel approaches to computation as far back as the 1940s. In discussions with Polish mathematician Stanislav Ulem at Los Alamos, he conceived the idea of cellular automata, pixel-like grids of simple computational units, all obeying the same rule, and all altering their states simultaneously by communicating only with their immediate neighbors. With characteristic bravura, von Neumann went so far as to design on paper the key components of a self-reproducing cellular automaton, including a horizontal line of cells comprising a tape and blocks of cellular circuitry, implementing machines A and B. Designing a cellular automaton is far harder than ordinary programming because every cell or pixel is simultaneously altering its own state and its environment. When that kind of parallelism operates on many scales at once and is combined with randomness and subtle feedback effects as in biological computation, it becomes even harder to reason about, program or debug. Nonetheless, we should keep in mind what these two pioneers understood so clearly. Computing doesn't have to be done with a central processor, logic gates, binary arithmetic or sequential programs. One can compute in an infinite variety of ways. Turing and his successors have shown that they are all equivalent, one of the greatest accomplishments of theoretical computer science. This platform independence or multiple realizability means that any computer can emulate any other one. If the computers are of different designs though, the emulation may run slowly. For instance, von Neumann's self-reproducing cellular automaton has never been physically built, though that would be fun to see. It was only emulated for the first time in 1994, nearly half a century after he designed it. It couldn't have happened much earlier. A serial computer requires serious processing power to loop through the automaton's 6,329 cells over the 63 billion time steps required for the automaton to complete its reproductive cycle. On screen, it worked as advertised. A pixelated two-dimensional Rube Goldberg machine squatting a stride, a 145,315 cell long instruction table. It's a great machine for a computer to make a parallel neural network, air to Turing's unorganized machine. Consequently, running big neural nets, like those in transformer-based chatbots, has only recently become practical thanks to ongoing progress in the miniaturization of the digital network. the Turing's unorganized machine. Consequently, running big neural nets like those in transformer-based chatbots has only recently become practical thanks to ongoing progress in the miniaturization, speed, and parallelism of digital computers. In 2020, my colleague Alex Mordvinsov devised a clever combination of modern neural nets, Turing's morphogenesis, and von Neumann's cellular automata. Alex's creation, the neural cellular automaton, or NCA, replaces the simple, perpixel rule of a classic cellular automaton with a neural net. This net, capable of sensing and affecting a few values representing local morphogen concentrations, can be trained to grow any desired pattern or image, not just zebra stripes or leopard spots. NCA cells don't literally have neural nets inside them, but they do run highly evolved nonlinear and purposeive programs to decide on the actions they will take in the world, given external stimulus and an internal state. NCA's offer a general way to model the range of possible behaviors of cells whose actions don't involve movement but only changes of state, here represented as color, and the absorption or release of chemicals. The first NCA, Alex showed me, was of a lizard emoji, which could regenerate not only its tail, but also its limbs and head. It was a powerful demonstration of how complex multicellular life can think locally, yet act globally, even when each cell or pixel is running the same program. Just as each of your cells is running the same DNA. This was our first foray into the field known today as artificial life or a life. Artificial life. Von Neumann's work on self-reproducing automata shows us that in a universe whose physical laws do not allow for computation, it would be impossible for life to evolve. Luckily, the physics of our universe do allow for computation, as proven by the fact that we can build computers and that we're here at all. Now, we're in a position to ask, in a universe capable of computation, how often will life arise? Clearly it happened here. Was it a miracle, an inevitability, or somewhere in between? A few collaborators and I set out to explore this question in late 2023. Our first experiments used an esoteric programming language invented 30 years earlier by a Swiss physics student and amateur juggler, Urban Miller. I'm afraid he called this language, brainfuck. Please direct all naming feedback his way. However, the shoe fits. It is a beast to program in. Here, for instance, is a brainfuck program that prints hello world and good luck making any sense of it. Plus plus plus plus plus plus plus open bracket minus greater than plus plus plus plus plus less than close bracket greater than minus open bracket greater than open bracket plus plus plus plus plus and so on. The upside of brainfuck is its utter minimalism. It's not quite a single instruction language like subleg, but as you can hear, it includes only a handful of operations. Like a Turing machine, it specifies a read right head that can step left the less than instruction or right the greater than instruction along a tape. The plus and minus instructions increment and decrement the byte at the current position on the tape. The comma and period instructions input a byte from the console or output a byte to it. Finally, the open bracket and close bracket instructions implement looping. Open bracket will skip forward to its matching close bracket if the byte at the current position is zero and close bracket will jump back to its matching open bracket if the byte is non-zero. That's it. It's hard to believe that brainfuck could be used to fully implement, say, the Windows operating system, but it is Turing complete. Here that means, given enough time and memory that is a long enough tape, it can emulate any other computer and compute anything that can be computed. In our version, which we call BFF, there's a soup containing thousands of tapes, each of which includes both code and data. This is key. In classic brainfuck, the code is separate from the tape, whereas in BFF, we wanted the code to be able to modify itself. That can only happen if the code itself is on the tape as Turing originally envisioned. BFF tapes are a fixed length, 64 bytes. They start off filled with random bytes. Then they interacted random over and over. In an interaction, two randomly selected tapes are stuck end to end, and this combined 128 long tape is run, potentially modifying itself. The 64 byte long halves are then pulled back apart and returned to the soup. Once in a while, a byte value is randomized as cosmic rays do to DNA. Since BFF has only seven instructions and there are 256 possible byte values, following random initialization only 7 out of 256 or 2.7 percent of the bytes in a given tape will contain valid instructions. Any non-instructions are simply skipped over. Thus at first, not much comes of interactions between tapes. Once in a while, a valid instruction will modify a byte, and this modification will persist in the soup. On average though, only a couple of computational operations take place per interaction, and usually they have no effect. In other words, while any kind of computation is theoretically possible in this toy universe, precious little actually takes place at first. Random mutation may alter a byte here and there. Even when a valid instruction causes a byte to change though, the alteration is arbitrary and purposeless. But after millions of interactions, something magical happens. The tapes begin to reproduce. As they spawn copies of themselves and each other, randomness gives way to intricate order. The suddenness of this change resembles a phase transition in matter, as between gas and liquid or liquid and solid. Indeed, the initial disorder of the soup is very much like that of randomly whizzing gas molecules. Hence random non-functional code has been called Turing gas. However, in BFF, it condenses into functioning code, which is something far more complex than a solid or a liquid. We could call it Computronium, since when the phase transition occurs, the amount of computation taking place skyrockets. Remember reproduction requires computation. Two of BrainFox 7 instructions, the OpenBracket and CloseBracket, are dedicated to conditional branching and defined loops in the code. Reproduction requires at least one such loop, copy bytes until done, causing the number of instructions executed in an interaction to climb into the thousands. The code is no longer random, but obviously, purposive, in the sense that its function can be analyzed and reverse engineered. An unlucky mutation can break it, rendering it unable to reproduce. Over time, the code evolves clever strategies to increase its robustness to such damage. This emergence of function and purpose is just like what we see in organic life at every scale. So we can talk about the function of the circulatory system, a kidney, or a mitochondrion, and how they can fail, even though nobody designed these systems. We reproduced our basic result with a variety of other programming languages and environments. Alex of Neural Cellular Automata renowned created another beautiful mashup, this time between cellular automata and BFF. Each of a 200 by 200 array of pixels contains a program tape, and interactions occur only between neighboring tapes on the grid. In a nod to our nerdy childhoods, the tapes are interpreted as instructions for the iconic Xylog Z80 microprocessor, launched in 1976 and used in many 8-bit computers over the years, including the Sinclair ZX Spectrum, Osborne 1, and TRS 80. Here too, complex replicators soon emerge from random interactions, evolving and spreading across the grid in successive waves. More simulations suggest that, in general, life arises spontaneously whenever conditions permit. Those conditions seem minimal, little more than an environment capable of supporting computation, some randomness, and enough time. Let's pause and take stock of why this is so remarkable. On an intuitive level, one does not expect function or purposeiveness to emerge spontaneously. To be sure, we've known for a long time that a modest degree of order can emerge from initially random conditions. For instance, the lapping of waves can approximately sort the sand on a beach, creating a gradient from fine to coarse. But if we were to begin with sand on a beach subject to random wave action and came back after a few hours to find a poem written there, or the sand grains fused into a complex electronic circuit, we would assume someone was messing with us. The extreme improbability of complex order arising spontaneously is generally understood to follow from thermodynamics, the branch of physics concerned with the statistical behavior of matter subject to random thermal fluctuations. That is, of all matter, since above absolute zero, everything is subject to such randomness. Matter subject to random forces is supposed to become more random, not less. And by growing, reproducing, evolving, and indeed by existing at all, life seems to violate this principle. The violation is only apparent for life requires an input of free energy, allowing the forces of entropy to be kept at bay. Still, the seemingly spontaneous emergence and complexification of living systems has appeared to be, if not strictly disallowed by physical laws, at least unexplained by them. That's why the great physicist Erwin Schrodinger wrote, in an influential little book he published in 1944 entitled What Is Life. Living matter, while not eluding the laws of physics as established up to date, is likely to involve other laws of physics hitherto unknown, which, however, once they have been revealed, will form just as integral a part of this science as the former. Thermodynamics More turning to those other laws of physics, it's helpful to take a closer look at the original ones, and especially the second law of thermodynamics. These are deep waters. While the fundamental ideas date back to the groundbreaking work of 19th century mathematical physicist Ludwig Boltzmann, we can understand their essence without math. Nonetheless, Boltzmann's conceptually challenging ideas flummoxed many of his fellow scientists, with the implications of his work continued to stir controversy even today. Much has been made of Einstein turning our everyday notions of space and time inside out, with his theory of relativity, developed in its initial form in 1905, just a year before Boltzmann struggling with bipolar disorder ended his own life. Arguably though, Boltzmann's earlier ideas disrupt our intuitions about time, cause, and effect even more radically than Einstein's theory of relativity. Let's dive in. The second law of thermodynamics holds that any closed system will rise in entropy over time, becoming increasingly disordered. A hand-powered lawnmower, for example, starts off as a beautifully polished machine with sharp helical blades, round wheels, and toothed gears, all coupled together on smoothly rotating bearings. If left out in the elements, the bearings will seize up, the blades will dull, and oxidation will set in. After enough time, only a heap of rust will remain. Similarly, if you were to take a dead bacterium, which, though a lot smaller, is far more complicated than a pushmower, and drop it into a beaker of water, its cell membrane would eventually degrade, its various parts would spill out, and after a while only simple molecules would remain dispersed uniformly throughout the beaker. The second law gives time its arrow, because the fundamental laws of physics in our universe are very nearly time reversible. Strange, but true. Newton's equations, classical dynamics, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetism, Schrodinger's equations, quantum physics, Einstein's equations, special and general relativity, all of these physical laws would work the same way if time ran in reverse. The difference between past and future evaporates when we look only at the mathematics of dynamical laws, or only at an individual microscopic event in the universe. The distinction between past and future, or cause and effect, only comes into view when we zoom out from that microscopic world of individual events, and consider instead their statistics. Here's a common undergraduate thought experiment to illustrate this point in the case of Newtonian dynamics. Imagine video footage of balls on a billiard table, all in random positions and moving in random directions. They will collide with one another and with the bumpers at the edge of the table, bouncing off at new angles. If we unrealistically assume frictionless motion and fully elastic collisions, i.e. balls don't slow down as they roll and none of the collision energy is dissipated as heat. This would go on forever. This summed momenta and summed energies of the balls will remain constant, and it will be impossible to tell whether you're watching the video forward or in reverse. In such a universe, causality has no meaning because nothing distinguishes causes from effects. If the initial conditions were random, then the positions of the balls will continue to be randomly distributed over the table's surface as they all bounce around transferring some of their energy to each other with every collision. It would be astronomically unlikely for the balls to all bunch up in one spot. Their velocity is two will be randomly distributed, both in direction and magnitude, so it would also be astronomically unlikely for them to, for instance, suddenly all be moving precisely parallel to the table's edges. And disorder, in other words, is a stable equilibrium. In the presence of any thermal noise that is random perturbation, it's the only stable equilibrium. Suppose though that the near impossible happens. You see 15 of the balls converge into a perfect, stock still triangular grid, each ball just touching its neighbors, while the cue ball, having absorbed all of the combined kinetic energy of the other 15, whizzes away from the triangle. Aha! Now we know that we're watching a pool break, and we know that we're watching it in reverse. The arrow of time has been established. Along with it, we have causation. The triangle broke because it was hit by the cue ball. Theoretically, nothing prevents the exact series of collisions from happening that would result in all of the energy being transferred to a single ball while leaving the others arrayed in a perfect triangle. But statistically, it's vanishingly unlikely for such an ordered state to arise out of disorder. Unless perhaps some mastermind set the balls in motion just so. Although key thermodynamic concepts were not developed until the 19th century, an enlightenment era belief in a god who set the universe in motion just so arises intuitively from the apparent impossibility of order arising spontaneously out of disorder. In a mechanical, billiard table universe where the laws of physics are inviolable and the laws of statistics seem to inneccerably degrade any pre-existing order over time, it seems absurd that anything as complicated as life could arise spontaneously without some supernatural agent acting as prime mover. Probably a god with exquisite foresight could have initialized the big bang such that in the Earth's oceans billions of years ago, simple organic molecules floating around apparently at random could coalesce into a working bacterium. An improbability many, many orders of magnitude less likely than 15 out of 16 whizzing billiard balls spontaneously coalescing into an unmoving triangle. The billiard ball universe I've just described may seem abstract or arbitrary, but 19th century theorists like Boltzmann had become interested in this problem for the most practical of reasons. It was the physics behind steam power, hence the entire industrial revolution. Engineering had preceded theory as it often does. Thomas Newcomen, an English inventor and Baptist lay preacher, devised the first practical fuel burning engine in 1712. It was based on a heating and cooling cycle. First, steam from a boiler was allowed to flow into a cylindrical chamber raising a piston. Then the steam valve closed and a second valve opened, injecting a jet of cold water, causing the steam to condense and pull the piston back down. As the piston rose and fell, it rocked a giant beam back and forth, which in Newcomen's original design was used to pump water out of flooded mines, which in turn supplied the coal these engines would soon be consuming so voraciously. Scottish inventor and entrepreneur James Wat greatly improved the steam engine design in 1776, making it a practical replacement for human and animal power across a wide range of applications. This was when the industrial revolution really got underway. For the first time, human-made machines began to metabolize on a large scale, eating complex organic molecules to perform mechanical work. Soon far more energy would be flowing through this artificial metabolism than through the Krebs cycle in our own bodies. It was, in the broad sense I've been using in this book, a major evolutionary transition, a symbiogenetic event between humans and machines, like earlier symbiosis between humans and draft animals. Machine metabolism allowed human society to explode from its pre-industrial scale about 1 billion people in 1800, most of whom lived in extreme poverty, to its scale today, 8 billion, most of whom no longer live in poverty. In the process, we've become nearly as dependent on machines for our continued existence as they are on us. However, even as coal-powered engines transformed the Victorian landscape, both figuratively and literally for the pollution was dire, nobody understood them at a deep level. What was heat and how could it be converted into physical work? For a time, the leading theory held that heat was a kind of invisible, weightless fluid, caloric, that could flow spookily into and through other matter. By combining Newtonian physics, statistical calculations, and experimental tests, Boltzmann and his colleagues figured out what was really going on. Their conceptual setup was a three-dimensional version of the billiard table, in which the balls were gas molecules whizzing around in a pressurized chamber bouncing off its walls. Calculating the average effect of all the bouncing led to the ideal gas law, which established theoretical relationships between the pressure, volume, and temperature of a gas. The theory closely matched observations by experimentalists and engineers. Volume is straightforward, that's just the size of the chamber. But the idea that pressure is the aggregate force on the chamber's walls as molecules bounce off them, and that temperature is the average kinetic energy of those whizzing molecules was a profound insight. There was no need for any mysterious caloric fluid. Heat was just motion on a microscopic scale. And the tendency toward a random distribution of molecular positions and momenta explains why if you open a valve between two chambers containing gas at different pressures and or temperatures, those pressures and temperatures will quickly equalize. Before moving beyond classical thermodynamics, let's add a bit more realism to our billiard ball universe. We know that balls bouncing around a billiard table don't actually go on bouncing forever. They encounter friction, slowing down as they roll. And when they bounce off each other, the collisions are slightly inelastic, meaning that after the collision, they're…

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0007 - Chapter 7

Dynamic Stability Recall that life seemed deeply weird to Schrodinger because living things appear to violate the Second Law. If the bacterium we drop into a beaker of water is alive rather than dead, and free energy is available in a form the bacterium can use, and the water contains simple molecules suitable for building more bacteria, then over time we will see the very opposite of an increase in disorder. After a while the beaker will be full of bacteria, reproducing, cooperating, and competing with each other. The bacteria will even be evolving. If the beaker is sufficiently large the size of a planet for instance, and we wait a few billion years, then eventually being as complicated as us may be in there, along with cities, advanced technologies, and perhaps plans to colonize a nearby beaker. None of these processes can occur without free energy. For us it comes primarily from the Sun. Thermodynamics tells us that even if the Second Law appears to be violated locally it still holds when we zoom out. Order created in one place comes at the expense of increased disorder elsewhere. Hence, pollution, the finite lifetime of the Sun, and the eventual heat death of the universe. What concerns us here isn't this big picture, but it's apparent local violations, and the way they seem to become increasingly transgressive over time. The puzzle isn't only that bacteria exist, but that as time passes life on Earth seems to become more complex, from pro-carriots to eukaryotes, from eukaryotes to multicellular animals, from simple multicellular animals to ones with nervous systems, from brainy animals to complex societies, from horses and plows to space travel, and AI. Is there any general principle behind that complexification process, a kind of, however, or yes and, to the dismal Second Law? And could it account not only for evolution and complexification, but also for a biogenesis? Yes, and yes. BFF can offer us a highly simplified model system for understanding that principle, just as an idealized billiard table gives us a model for understanding basic thermodynamics. There is a rise in BFF because an entity that reproduces is more dynamically stable than one that doesn't. In other words, if we start with one tape that can reproduce, and one that can't, then at some later time we're likely to find many copies of the one that can reproduce, but we're unlikely to find the other at all because it will have been degraded by noise or overwritten. D.Pross, a professor emeritus of chemistry, at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, describes the same phenomenon using the bulkier phrase dynamic kinetics stability or D.K.S. I'll drop kinetic since the idea also applies far beyond process field of chemical kinetics, describing the rates at which chemical reactions take place. In BFF, for example, dynamic stability can just as well apply to programs or program fragments. BFF is, plus points out, a population of replicating molecules can be more stable than even the hardiest of passive materials. A passive object may be fragile like a soap bubble or robust like a stone sculpture. The sculpture might endure for longer, but in the end it's still ephemeral. Every encounter it has with anything else in the world will cause its composition or structure to degrade its individual identity to blur. For a sculpture, it's all downhill. That's the second law it work, as usual. A self-reproducing molecule like the DNA inside a living bacterium is another matter. It is thermodynamically fragile, especially if we consider its identity to consist not only of a general structure but of a long sequence of specific nucleotides. However, its pattern is not just robust but anti-fragile. As long as DNA is able to reproduce, an inherently dynamic process, that pattern can last essentially forever. A bit of environmental stress or adversity can even help DNA maintain or improve its functionality. This is how order overcomes disorder. In fact, Darwinian selection is equivalent to the second law once we expand our notion of stability to include populations of replicators. To a thermodynamic lens, Darwin's central observation was that a more effective replicator is more stable than a less effective one. As Prost puts it, matter tends to become transformed from less stable to more stable forms. That is what chemical kinetics and thermodynamics is all about. And what is the central law that governs such transformations? The second law. In both the static and kinetic worlds, chemical systems tend to become transformed into more stable ones. Thermodynamics stability in the regular chemical world, dynamic kinetics stability in the replicator world. As a chemist, process sensitive to the close relationships between energy, entropy, and stability, whether static or dynamic. However, he does not explicitly make a connection to the theory of computing. It now seems clear that by unifying thermodynamics with the theory of computation, we should be able to understand life as the predictable outcome of a statistical process rather than regarding it uneasily as technically permitted yet mysterious. Our artificial life experiments demonstrate that, when computation is possible, it will be a dynamical attractor, since replicating entities are more dynamically stable than non-replicating ones. And as von Neumann showed, replicators are inherently computational. BFF has no concept of energy, but in our universe, replicators require an energy source. This is because, in general, computation involves irreversible steps, otherwise known as causes and effects, and thus computing consumes free energy. That's why the chips in our computers draw power and generate heat when they run. And why my computer heats up when it runs BFF? Life must draw power and generate heat for the same reason. It is inherently computational. Complexification When we pick a tape out of the BFF soup after millions of interactions, once replicators have taken over, we often see a level of complexity in the program on that tape that seems unnecessarily even implausibly high. A working replicator could consist of just a handful of instructions in a single loop, requiring a couple of hundred operations to run. Instead, we often see instructions filling up a majority of the 64 bytes, multiple and complex nested loops, and thousands of operations per interaction. Where did all this complexity come from? It certainly doesn't look like the result of simple Darwinian selection, operating on the random text generated by a proverbial million monkeys typing on a million typewriters. In fact, such complexity emerges even with zero random mutation, that is, given only the initial randomness in the soup, which works out to fewer bytes than the text of this book. Hardly a million monkeys, and far too few random bytes to contain more than a few consecutive instructions, let alone a whole working program. The answer recalls Lin Margulis' great insight, the central role of symbiosis in evolution, rather than random mutation and selection. When we look carefully at the quiescent period in the BFF soup before tapes begin replicating, we notice a steady rise in the amount of computation taking place. We are observing the rapid emergence of imperfect replicators. Very short bits of code that, in one way or another, have some non-zero probability of generating more code. Even if the code produced is not like the original, it's still code, and only code can produce more code, non-code can produce anything. Thus a selection process, wherein code begets code, is at work from the very beginning. This inherently creative, self-catalyzing process is far more important than random mutation in generating novelty. When bits of proliferating code combine to form a replicator, it's a symbiotic event. By working together, these bits of code generate more code than they could separately, and the code they generate will in turn produce more code that does the same, eventually leading to whole tape replication and an exponential takeoff. A closer look at the BFF soup prior to the exponential takeoff reveals distinct phases of pre-life, which might have had close analogs during a biogenesis on Earth. In the first phase, individual instructions occasionally generate another individual instruction. But this is more akin to a simple chemical reaction than to any real computation. The instructions are not acting as part of any larger program. In the second phase, we begin to see instructions in particular positions, or in particular combinations, that are likely to lead to copies of themselves than one would expect by random chance, albeit often in indirect ways. Autocatalytic sets start to form, cycles of dynamical interactions that mutually reinforce each other. These two can arise spontaneously in the chemical world, and have long been theorized to have driven a biogenesis. At this point, with autocatalytic fragments of code proliferating and colliding, a leap becomes possible that brings us beyond the world of digital chemistry and into the world of real computation, the emergence of the first true replicators. These are no longer mere autocatalytic sets, but short programs that copy themselves or each other using looped instructions. With this leap to computation comes an enormous upgrade in availability. Because now, any change made to a program that does not break its copy loop will be heritable. Thus, classical Darwinian selection can kick in, allowing adaptation to a changing environment or speciation for occupying diverse niches. If we insist on making a distinction between non-life and life, this might be a reasonable place to draw that line. However, these earliest replicating programs are unlikely to cleanly copy a whole tape. Often, they only copy short stretches of tape, which may get pasted into arbitrary locations, resulting unpredictable results. As these scrappy, fragmentary replicators proliferate, the BFF soup enters a chaotic phase. Despite the churn, the tapes have not, at this point, resolved into any obvious structure. To the naked eye, they still look like random junk. Although the rising amount of computation taking place, as measured both by the average number of operations per interaction and the density of instructions per tape, suggests that something is a foot. Tracking the provenance of every bite in the soup, starting from random initialization, can make sense of the apparent chaos. At first, almost every bite of every tape remains whatever it was at initialization time. If we draw a line from each bite's current position on the tape to its original source position, the lines will all extend back to time zero in parallel, like the warp threads of a loom. Once in a while, a bite will change, cutting a thread, or get copied, pulling it across the other threads diagonally. With the rise of scrappy replicating programs, all remaining dependencies on the past are quickly cut, as replicators copy over each other in a frenzy of creative destruction. Any given bite might get copied hundreds of times to a series of different tape locations, in the process wiping out whatever had previously been there. Shortly afterward, all of those copies might get wiped out in turn by some other more efficiently replicating fragment. Soon every bite's history becomes very brief in time, yet complex in space, a short-lived snarl of sideways jumps. The loom becomes all weft and no warp. Are these scrappy replicators competing or cooperating? Both. Replicators that can't keep up are wiped out, along with any non-replicating bites. Surviving replicators, on the other hand, continually form chimeras, those composite creatures in classical mythology, like the combination of lion, goat, and snake. BFF replicators combine with other replicators, or even copies of themselves, in the process becoming more effective. These are, once more, sympathetic events, sub-entities merging to form a larger, more capable, more comprehensive. This chaotic phase is such a potent crucible for directed evolution that it generally doesn't last long. It rapidly produces a robust, whole-tap replicator, which then takes off exponentially, resulting in the dramatic transition to the organized structures and large amounts of computation that are BFF's most obvious feature. At this point, artificial life seems to spontaneously emerge. But as we can now appreciate, there's nothing spontaneous about it. Replicators had been present all along, and each larger replicator is composed of smaller ones, an inverted tree of life, consisting of mergers over time, rather than splits. However, evolution's creative work is not done yet. After the takeoff of a fully functional tape replicator, we often see yet further symbiotic events. From a classical Darwinian standpoint, this seems puzzling, since further evolution seems superfluous once whole tapes are replicating reliably. How could fitness possibly improve further once a tape copies itself in its entirety every time it interacts with another tape? We must consider that since the instructions for whole tape replication don't occupy all 64 bytes, there's extra space on the tape that could be dedicated to anything. That's the point of von Neumann style replication. It allows for open-ended evolution precisely because the tape can contain additional information beyond the code needed for replication itself. Any extra replicated bytes could, of course, be random, just passive, purposeless information cargo hitchhiking from one generation to the next. But if these bytes contain instructions, those instructions can run. And if they can run, they can replicate themselves too. Thus, the symbiogenetic process can continue to operate, creating additional replicators within an already replicating tape. Sometimes these sub-replicators even produce multiple copies of themselves in a single interaction. Sub-replicators can interact with their host in many ways. They can kill the host by damaging its replication code, which is generally catastrophic for the sub-replicator as it thereby destroys the environment within which it can run. Sub-replicators can be neutral leaving the host's replication machinery alone. Or they can be symbiotic, for instance by conferring resistance to mutational damage via redundant copying of the host's code. The overall tendency is towards symbiosis since that is the most dynamically stable. Over time, code colonizes a large proportion of the 64 bytes. Cynbiosis is more dynamically stable than non-code, and its dynamic stability increases through symbiosis with yet more code, in particular when code fragments find ways to work in functional tandem. In a way, symbiosis is the very essence of functionality. When we talk about a kidney's function only making sense in context, we mean that it is in symbiosis with other functions, like those of the liver, breaking ammonia down into urea, the heart pumping blood, and so on. Each of these functions is purposeive precisely because its inputs are the outputs of others, its outputs are the inputs to others, and thus they form a network of dynamically stable cycles. The same is true of larger planetary scale into relationships. The purpose of plants from the perspective of animal life is to produce oxygen and sugar, which we breathe and eat. The purpose of animals from a plants perspective is to turn oxygen back into carbon dioxide and provide compost and pollination. Our growing understanding of life as a self-reinforcing dynamical process boils down not to things, but to networks of mutually beneficial relationships. At every scale, life is an ecology of functions. Those functions can be expressed computationally. We could even say that life is code. Individual computational instructions are the irreducible quanta of life. The minimal replicating set of entities, however immaterial and abstract they may seem, that come together to form bigger, more stable, and more complex replicators in ever ascending symbiotic cascades. In the toy universe of BFF, the seven special characters, less than greater than plus minus comma open bracket and close bracket, are the elementary instructions. On the primordial C floor, geothermally driven chemical reactions that could catalyze further chemical reactions likely played the same role. Under other conditions, on another planet, or in another universe, many different elementary interactions could do the same, as long as they are touring complete, enabling them to make the leap from autocatalytic sets to true replication. Virality Although BFF is only a toy universe, it can serve as a simplified model for life and evolution, just as a Newtonian billiardball universe can serve as a simplified model for the thermodynamics of ideal gases. As we've seen, some of BFF's predictions are quite different from those of classical Darwinian theory. One, BFF suggests that symbogenesis is a more important driver of evolutionary innovation than random mutation. Two, since symbogenesis must involve combinations of pre-existing dynamically stable entities, we should expect complex replicating entities to emerge after and be made of simpler ones. Three, as a result zooming in on sub-replicators within a larger replicator should allow us to peer back in evolutionary time. These phenomena should sound familiar. They're all consistent with Lin Margulis' observations, which flew in the face of 20th century biological orthodoxy, but are now, if not mainstream, at least gaining respectability. But wait, there's more. Four, due to the instability of the imperfect replicators leading up to the first true replicator, we should expect this first true replicator to be a historical event horizon, becoming the template for what follows and erasing independent traces of what came before. We see this on Earth too. Although the first chemical steps toward proto-life may still be taking place in environments like black smokers, we don't see the missing links. Where are the kinds of imperfect replicators that fuse together to form the simplest life forms today? We likely don't see them on their own because, as in BFF, their instability made them ephemeral, quickly displaced or absorbed by the first stably replicating cell, which might already have been recognisably kin to today's bacteria and archaea. Evolutionary biologists call this the last universal common ancestor, or Luka. Still, we can assume that many of the component parts of the most ancient surviving life forms, like the reverse crebs cycle and RNA replication, are fossilized fragments of earlier imperfect replicators. In the same vein, five, evolved code should not only include instructions for replicating itself as a whole, but also be rife with sub-sequences that contain instructions for independently replicating themselves. Six, if symbiosis among these parts generated the novelty driving the evolution of the whole, we should see evidence in the genome of many broken or incomplete sub-replicators. Seven, code that evolved through such hierarchical symbiotic replication should also contain many sequences that are repetitive or are copies of other parts. We can find all of these features in our own genetic code, and they don't correspond to what we would expect to see if our genomes had evolved primarily through mutation and selection. In the first complete human genome sequence was published in 2000, some surprises were in store. One was the astonishingly high proportion of so-called junk DNA that doesn't code for proteins, about 98%. How did it get there? Is it actually doing anything? We now understand that some of this junk is involved in gene regulation, but most is still of unknown or uncertain function. This inspection reveals, though, that much of our code, whether junk or otherwise, is viral. The reproductive cycle of viruses is an often told story. When traveling between cells, a virus looks like a bit of DNA or RNA packaged into a protein envelope capable of binding to a target cell and injecting its genetic payload. Once inside the cell, the viral code hijacks cellular resources to begin replicating, both copying its genetic material and manufacturing its envelope proteins. These assemble into more viruses, but nighically cranking out viral proteins, the cell may eventually burst, releasing a flood of virus particles to repeat the cycle. Retroviruses, like HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, include additional reverse transcription machinery for permanently incorporating their genetic material into the cells DNA. This makes them a lot harder for the host to clear. The key enzyme, reverse transcriptase, wasn't characterized until 1970, but Barbara McClintock, working at Cold Spring Harbor Lab on Long Island, had made an earlier discovery that turned out to be closely related. While studying the genetics of maze plants in the late 1940s and early 50s, McClintock found mobile segments of DNA that seemed to be able to cut and paste themselves into different locations on the genome, producing differently modeled color patterns in corn kernels. Although many of her colleagues were initially skeptical about these transposons or jumping genes, McClintock eventually won the Nobel Prize for her work. A much wider zoo of transposable elements has since been discovered, some of which don't just cut and paste, but copy and paste themselves. They are, in effect, replicators within our DNA. In fact, some of them are fully fledged retroviruses, including instructions not only for splicing their code into a host cells genome, but also for manufacturing envelope proteins, allowing that code to venture out into the world in search of other cells to infect. Retroviruses are unsettlingly intimate. HIV specifically targets immune cells, but if a retrovirus infects an egg or sperm cell, it can insert its code into an organism's germline, becoming a permanent part not only of that cell, but of an entire species. In a 2006 publication in the prestigious journal Nature, researchers at the University of Queensland in Australia reported catching a retrovirus in this act of becoming endogenous for the first time. An epidemic of leukemia and koalas had first been traced to a retrovirus, then this retrovirus was found to have invaded the koala germline over the previous century, causing the disease to become heritable. Does this mean the end of koalas? Probably not. The human genome is rife with signs that the same process has taken place many times in the history of our own species. At least 8% of our genome consists of endogenized retroviruses, the remnants of such retroviral invasions. Remember, 8% is several times more DNA than codes for our own genes. We usually think of viruses as mere disease agents, opportunistically parasitizing ourselves to reproduce since they have no reproductive machinery of their own. The reality may be very different though. As many of us know from our recent experience with COVID, viruses, and pathogens in general, tend to evolve into forms less lethal to their hosts over time, for obvious reasons. A dead host is a dead end for the pathogen too. There's mounting evidence that the relationship between virus and host can go even further to become symbiotic. Retroviral code in our genome, for instance, has become fundamental to the formation of the placenta, the immune system, cell differentiation, and brain function. Moreover, endogenized retroviruses are only the tip of an even larger iceberg. Nearly half of our genome consists of transposable elements of one kind or another. Some were probably one's retroviruses or vice versa. Fully sequenced genomes are often rife with lengthy stretches of highly repetitive sequences from long and complex to mere alternations of two or three symbols, evidence of sub-replicators running a mock. Other genomes, in other words, are not only reproduced as a whole, but include working reproductive sub-sequences at many scales. Some are new and can still cause disease. Others are older and may have lost the ability to make viral envelopes, or the other machinery needed to become infectious. And yet others have integrated themselves so deeply into our own code that they are no longer distinct. Some of this code even serves critical functions in our bodies. It's obvious that, at least by this last stage of the process, complete symbiosis has been established. Neither the host nor the sub-replicator could survive, let alone reproduce on its own. In his 2009 book, Viral Lutian, author and physician Frank Ryan goes further, arguing that viruses may have been symbionts all along. Plague viruses like HIV don't come from nowhere. They are species' jumpers. We know that HIV was originally SIV, the simian immunodeficiency virus, variants of which are endemic to old world primates, including African-green monkeys, Sudi-Menguebes, mandrels and chimpanzees. Yet many of these viruses don't sicken their original hosts. We also know that if a virus finds itself inside an organism whose physiology is too different from that of its original host, it can't gain purchase. A lucky thing for you, if you've ever swallowed a mouthful of seawater, which likely contained about a billion virus particles, most would have targeted single-celled marine life. The greatest danger seems to come from viruses adapted to a different but closely related species. Perhaps, when it kills, such a virus is doing its job, wiping out rivals who have invaded the original host's territory. Those could, in other words, work like an out-of-body immune system. Within our bodies, our immune systems seek out and destroy cells that are recognized as not us. Outside our bodies, our viruses could be similarly seeking out and destroying whole animals who are recognized as not us. Once a virus becomes endemic to a new population though, even if it initially kills many, it will differentiate, co-adapt, and perhaps eventually go native. One could consider bacterial pathogens through a similar lens, hence the well-documented plagues of smallpox that European colonists brought to the Americas, decimating native populations, and the virulent, though less deadly, civilis epidemic, believed to have been brought back to Europe by Columbus. Unlike bacteria though, retroviruses don't just take up residence in our environment or in our bodies, but fuse into our very genomes, becoming inextricably part of us, especially when they alter the germline. By sheer volume, our DNA appears to be made primarily of the layered remnants of many such past fusions. It seems clear that transposable elements and endogenous viral elements, or EVEs, have done much more editing of our genome in recent evolutionary history than mutation has, and they have been at this for a long, long time. Based on the best available evidence, viruses are at least as old as the last universal common ancestor, if not older. This ongoing ecology of mobile, self-reproducing, and even infectious genes causes this supposed tree of life to continue entangling with itself in the oddest ways. Probably a quarter of the cow genome, for instance, consists of copies of the retro transposed on Bove B. Bove B appears to have leapt many times between species to create a phylogenetic tree of its own, creating what science journalist Ed Young has called, a bizarre parallel universe where cows are more closely related to snakes than to elephants, and where one gecko is more closely related to horses than to other lizards. These are instances of horizontal gene transfer, or HGT, long associated with bacteria, but clearly more universal. Whether a bit of new DNA is acting in the moment as friend, foe, or somewhere in between, is just a matter of where on the symbiotic trajectory it falls. When brand new, it's unlikely to be friendly. But if it is persisted for a long time, and especially if it has become endogenous, its dynamic stability implies that it will have become non-lethal, or even friendly, due to combined evolutionary pressures on host, invader, and host plus invader as a holo-biont or a symbiotically fused entity. If some gene or other functionality in the fused code proves valuable to the larger whole, that functionality will be conserved, even as the sub-replicator's reproductive capability degrades and eventually vanishes. This is how new genetic functionality arises in general. In this slide, random point mutation can even be seen as something like a minimal A-biogenesis event, creating a tiny parasitic life form within the genome. On its own, it would of course be unable to reproduce since it possesses no independent reproductive machinery. Then again, neither does a virus. So like a virus, a mutation can reproduce using the host's resources which will copy it along with everything else. When introduced into the genome of a sophisticated existing organism, such a tiny, random entity is unlikely to be friendly though. As with any larger invasion, the mutation will either damage or kill its host and itself in the bargain, or achieve dynamic stability, either by being neutral or occasionally helpful. Hence, just as replicator thermodynamics encompasses classical thermodynamics as a special case, evolution via symbiogenesis can encompass classical Darwinian theory as a special case. Point mutation is unlikely to be the main driver of evolution once life has taken off, because it's so much weaker and slower on its own than higher order symbogenesis. Unlike point mutation, a chunk of code that has already circulated, jumping around in the genome or even between species, isn't random. It necessarily includes real functionality. And at least in some settings, that functionality has been under evolutionary pressure to help, or at least not kill its host. Evolution picks up steam over time, with major evolutionary transitions becoming more frequent, precisely because increasingly high orders of symbiogenesis become possible. When code evolves through symbiogenesis, it will develop a curious statistical structure. Parts of it will be copies or near copies of other parts, and as those parts establish symbiosis, they'll form a larger aggregate, which will also copy itself as a unit. This is reminiscent of, though not the same as, a fractal, a structure that resembles itself at a cascade of ever finer scales. Let's take a short detour through fractals and their relationship to biology, so that we can then consider the implications of evolution itself, exhibiting certain fractal-like properties. French-American mathematician Benoit Mendelbrot is the figure most associated with fractals, though they were first described by English meteorologist Louis Fry Richardson. In the aftermath of World War II, Richardson, a quaker, had been trying to build a mathematical model to predict the likelihood of conflicts between countries. One of the parameters in his model was the length of their common border. He was perplexed to find, though, that certain borders didn't appear to have agreed upon lengths. The Portuguese, for instance, reported that their border with Spain was 613 miles long, but the Spanish claimed that it was 754 miles long. This seemed like a weirdly large discrepancy for what ought to have been an easily survey distance. Richardson eventually figured out what was going on. The Spanish were using a higher-resolution map. Every twist and turn the Portuguese could see in the Minio duro and Guadiana rivers separating the countries had finer-scale twists and turns only visible on the Spanish map. Richardson showed that, if zooming in on any given meandering revealed more meandering, the total length of a self-similar curve like a coastline or a river can grow without limit as one measures it with an ever-smaller ruler. Fractal geometry is thus very different from the Euclidean geometry we all learned in school, where the length of a line or curve is well-defined and doesn't blow up when you zoom in. Of course, in real life, one can't zoom in forever, but fractals are still important mathematical tools for understanding structures that are self-similar over a range of scales, like rivers and coastlines. Living organisms exhibit obvious fractal properties in certain of their structures, such as tree branches, bronchial tubes, and circulatory systems. In structures like these, fractal geometry over some range of scales offers an elegant design solution to a biophysical problem. For instance, blood-carrying oxygen and nutrients needs to reach every cell in the body, which means that oxygenated blood has to be pumped through a branching network of tubes and these tubes, which are in Euclidean terms, one-dimensional, have to repeatedly subdivide to fill three-dimensional space. Hence, we have fractally branching and then merging networks of arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins. By working out the design properties of such fractal networks and their implications, theoretical physicist Jeffrey West and his collaborators at the Santa Feh Institute have figured out many fundamental scaling laws in biology. One of the most well-known results from this body of work explains why every mammalian heart will beat about 1.5 to 2 billion times over a lifetime, whether it belongs to an atrussian shrew, weighing a 20th of an ounce and living a year or so, or a blue whale, weighing over 300,000 pounds and living about a century. Self-similarity in general yields power-law scaling relationships, which look like straight lines when plotted on logarithmic axes. Body mass, for instance, has power-law relationships with metabolic rate, the total length of the circulatory system, and lifespan. Combining various power-law relationships to calculate the number of heartbeats in a lifetime causes all the scaling variables to cancel out beautifully, yielding the famous 1.5 to 2 billion beat constant. While the theory is not exact, humans, for example, live somewhat longer than predicted, it does a remarkable job of parsimoniously explaining a wide range of phenomena. Is life in general a kind of fractal then? No. A rhyme by British mathematician Augustus De Morgan is often invoked in describing fractals. Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs to bite them, and little fleas have lesser fleas and so add infinitum. The poem is funny precisely because it is absurd. Unlike an idealized fractal coastline, living systems are, in general, profoundly dissimilar across scales. While there are rare instances of the kind De Morgan describes, such as hyperaparasitoid wasps, tiny parasites that lay their eggs inside bigger wasps, one does not generally zoom in on a flea to discover a smaller flea, let alone add infinitum. Indeed, even coastlines are best characterized in real life as multi-fractals, systems with repetitive structure at every scale, but variability across scales. As a result, their power laws may also vary. For instance, zooming in twofold at one level of magnification, where the ruggedness is especially pronounced, might cause the apparent length to scale up by 2 to the 1.5th power, or approximately 2.83. While zooming in twofold at a magnification where the coastline appears smoother, might only cause the apparent length to scale up by 2 to the 1.16th power, or approximately 2.24. Every bump has bumps on it, but the bumps at one scale are shaped differently from the bumps that another, and some bumps are just bumpier than others. Similarly, although genomes are always replicated and are made of other genomes that are themselves replicated, every hole is different from its parts, just as an integrated circuit is different from a transistor. How then would one go about quantifying this multi-fractal-like property in a genome? The answer is closely related to data compression. Consider BFF. In its initial state, the tapes consist of random bytes. There is no repetitive structure. If we were reading through the tapes one byte at a time, the next byte would have an equal probability of assuming any value from 0 to 255 independent of any of the previous bytes. Therefore, the sequence is entirely unpredictable, which means that if you were to try compressing the soup with file compression software like Zip, the compressor wouldn't be able to squeeze the file size at all. This is, harkening back to thermodynamics, a working definition of a completely disordered state. Data are redundant, that is compressible, precisely to the degree that they are predictable, or equivalently exhibit order. Compression algorithms like those in Zip work by looking for patterns already encountered in the data stream and exploiting those patterns to encode subsequent data using as few bits as possible. The usual trick is to incrementally build a dictionary or phrase book out of the source material, and to substitute sections of the text for pointers into this dictionary whenever the pointer can be encoded in fewer bits than the original text. The dictionary is, in effect, a predictive model. And since the compressor builds that model incrementally as it compresses, the decompressor is able to incrementally reconstruct an identical copy of the model as it decompresses. Absent any prior knowledge about how to model a long sequence, describing it in terms of previously encountered parts of itself is a good strategy. The full text of this book zips down to about 35% of its original size as a raw text string, since some letters occur more often than others, many words repeat, and those words often combine into stock phrases. When BFF undergoes its sharp transition to whole tape replication, the tapes suddenly become highly compressible. They squeeze down to just 5% of their original size. Interestingly, many regions of the human genome are highly compressible too. These data streams compress so well because, at any given point in the sequence, one can often make a pretty good guess as to what the next letter will be simply by looking for the longest previous sequence that matches the current context. Such matches arise due to replication. In the human genome, we're not talking about replication at the level of the individual, but rather at the level of transposable elements or their fossil remnants within our genome. Similarly, even a single BFF tape is highly compressible because it formed through a symbiotic fusion of smaller replicators, and these replicators are themselves likely to be either copies of each other or related to each other. Like fractals, sequences of symbols constructed by repeatedly copying sub-sequences of all lengths exhibit power-law scaling. In this case, between the lengths of repeated sequences and their frequency. For instance, a replicated sequence twice the length of another might be found half as often, which is pretty often. These statistics would be dramatically different for random sequences where increasing the sequence length would cause a much faster exponential decline in expected frequency. Sequences constructed according to a fixed self-copying rule are, in a sense, infinitely compressible for they contain only as much information as it would take to write down the recipe, no matter how long the sequence. By contrast, in a complex replicating system like BFF, let alone the genome, the way any particular set of replicating sub-sequences combined to form a larger replicating sequence will always be specific. It will depend on the functional particulars of how those parts come together to make a working hole. Therefore, each such combination adds novelty or information. However, that information will be much less than would be needed to specify an arbitrary symbol sequence of the same length. When we look for this property in BFF and in human genome data, that's just what we find. Not only do both compress very well, they also compress better and better the longer the stream of data gets. For instance, a single BFF tape compresses somewhat, but the whole soup compresses better, and as the size of the soup grows, the compression ratio continues to improve. Though no matter how much has already been seen, the remainder is never fully predictable. Similarly, while a single stretch of a human genome already compresses well, the whole genome compresses better. In the statistical context of many other human genomes, so much of the information in your genome is redundant, that it could be compressed to a file size small enough to send as an email attachment. The pattern continues if we zoom yet farther out to consider genomes across species. Hence, the famous statistic that the human genome is 98% identical to the chimpanzee genome, and 60% similar to that of the fruit fly. While common ancestry alone can explain many of the similarities across species, though not all as both B illustrates, such classical Darwinian arguments can't explain why the genome of a single individual is also so repetitive. That only makes sense when we begin to consider genomes to be made out of smaller genomes. DNA and BFF tapes, in other words, are both systems that evolve through what we could call multi-fractal symbiosis. Our genomes are aggregates of cooperating replicators all the way down. That's why they are so compressible. But it's also why wonderful new kinds of complexity emerge at every scale, and therefore why, in biology, we can always learn something new by zooming in or out. Embodiment There is a profound yet subtle relationship between the multi-fractal properties of our bodies and the multi-fractal properties of the genome. The relationship is subtle because the genetic code is by no means a one-to-one blueprint explicitly representing the body's final shape. One might imagine, for instance, that because a snake has hundreds of ribs, it might have a stretch of DNA coding for a vertebra and rib pair that might have replicated itself a few hundred times in the snake's genome. Could snakes be the result of a retro-transposed on coding for ribs run wild like both B? Not exactly. So-called hawks' genes shared widely among animals control overall body plan, and they execute their program using a combination of gene regulation and the kind of distributed computation during described in his work on morphogenesis. During embryonic development, ribs begin as a self-organized standing wave in the concentrations of chemical morphogens, the same kind of process that gives cows their spots and tigers their stripes. Whereas patterns in skin coloration merely involve varying pigmentation, though, the developmental program for a rib involves many subsequent morphogenetic steps. This mechanism is vastly more powerful, general, and available than merely replicating some Build a Rib code. It reuses code just as any decent programmer would, invoking the same Build a Rib function a hundred times instead of copying and pasting it a hundred times. Thus, tweaking rib flexibility or curvature involves making one change not a hundred. Evolution can produce real programs that reuse code because life is computational. Remember that if you're a replicator of the kind von Neumann described, you need to contain instructions for building yourself, including a machine B to copy those instructions and a machine A, the universal constructor to follow them. The universal constructor is the engine not only of reproduction, but also of growth, development, healing, and maintenance. It created your circulatory system and skin during embryonic development. It also heals your skin and replaces the torn capillaries underneath when you get a cut. As long as you are alive, your body will continuously construct and reconstruct itself. The code never stops running. And since a universal constructor is a kind of universal Turing machine, its computations or equivalently mathematical functions are inherently compositional. Complex functions or programs can be made of sub functions, which can in turn be made of sub sub functions until at bottom everything could be expressed in terms of the elementary instructions of a Turing machine. Functions can even be made out of themselves. In computer science, this is known as recursion. The Fibonacci sequence, for example, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, and so on, where each number is the sum of the previous two, is most easily expressed as the recursive function, f of n equals f of n minus 1 plus f of n minus 2 for numbers greater than 1, with f of 0 equals f of 1 equals 1. We find Fibonacci numbers in biology all the time, as in the spiral pattern of a pine cone, the head of a sunflower, and the chambers of a nodalus. This is a clue that recursive computation takes place in the construction of pine trees, sunflowers, and nodaluses. The smoking gun, though, is the growth of self-similar structures in the body. Compositionality and recursion are what allow genetic code to build a many-tiered fractal like the circulatory system. Code for building ribs or nodalus segments could, in theory, just be copied a hundred times, but that's not possible for arteries, veins, or capillaries, where the number of segments and branches becomes astronomically large. The blood vessel branching code must get reused, and with relatively minor tweaks, it must be possible for the parameters of that code to be adjusted, so that the branching stops at the appropriate size for a shrew, or goes on to construct something the size of a blue whale, since shrews and whales are, in the grand scheme of things, close relatives. From an evolutionary perspective, compositionality implies a hierarchical network of symbiotic relationships. The bacteria that became mitochondria and the archaea that engulfed them, each started with the code they needed to reproduce themselves. When they merged into a eukaryote, they still needed to retain the instructions for their own reproduction, but they also needed to evolve additional functionality from mutual regulation. When eukaryotes became multicellular, the same process needed to happen again. Our cells still know how to reproduce individually, and indeed, cellular reproduction is a fundamental operation involved in the larger scale growth and reproduction of a whole animal. What is true of evolution is also true of an individual organism's development. Blood vessels, for instance, aren't just euclidean line segments, but tubes made of layers of smooth muscle cells. Each of those cells contains a complement of organelles, and each mitochondrion in each of those cells contains its own membranes and loop of bacterial DNA. A living organism is a compositional structure, par excellence. It could only be built computationally through the composition of many functions, and life could only have evolved as the hierarchical composition of those functions, that is, through symbiogenesis. Daisy World All definitions of life are controversial. Most seem to require caveats or exceptions, and none has advanced our understanding of biology. Frustrated with the state of affairs, biochemist Andrew Ellington has gone so far as to assert that there is no such thing as life. Life is not a meaningful scientific term. It is a term for poets, not scientists. Ellington's position may sound extreme, but it's more defensible than the dogmatic definition in many biology textbooks, that living organisms have, the ability to eat, metabolize, excrete, breathe, move, grow, reproduce, and be responsive to external stimuli. By this definition, viruses aren't alive, which might seem reasonable, but neither are mules or worker bees since they are sterile. Or consider a leaner definition popular among astrobiologists. Life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of Darwinian evolution. Better, but by this definition, parasites are not alive since they are at self-sustaining. Then again, is any life form truly self-sustaining, not of it eats? How can a self be meaningfully circumscribed? And while life on Earth is based on chemistry, should we really insist on this as a requirement? Functionalism would argue otherwise. So here's my own attempt. Life is self-modifying-computronium arising from selection for dynamic stability. It evolves through the symbiotic composition of simpler dynamically stable entities. Notice that my definition doesn't stipulate any specific function. However, in defining life computationally, it is functional. And in a world where the second law holds, dynamic stability implies that those functions must include some combination of self-construction, self-repair, or reproduction. All of these are computations that require code to be able to read and write code, hence the self-modifying qualifier. Computronium is generally understood to be a phase of matter, but the matter here could be anything that can support computation, including bytes in BFF or pixels in a cellular automaton. Furthermore, unlike gases, liquids, or solids, which are essentially uniform at macroscopic scales, the phase of matter associated with life is necessarily lumpy. One reason is that a uniform material can't carry out general computation. Computronium must, at its finest scale, contain distinct interacting components. There's a deeper reason too. Dynamics stability implies the existence of discrete units, a self or a population of selves, for without some model of a self or a selves, it would be impossible to say what is stable. And since life composes itself symbiotically, there are what's at multiple scales, in our case from molecules to mitochondria, cells, whole organisms, and beyond. Studying each what requires zooming in or out to focus on the dynamic stability of a different kind of entity. At the most zoomed out scale, life consists of a single lump, for us that would be the Earth. Is it too alive? Physicist and astrobiologist Sarah Walker argues that it is not, precisely because it's a singleton. Walker believes that the Earth will only become alive if and when we colonize another planet, thereby reproducing. My definition of life doesn't require reproduction, but it does require dynamic stability. Can that even be defined for a singleton? It can, in a sense first formalized in the 1970s and 80s by the independent scientist James Lovelock, together with Lin Margulis and others. Their Gaia hypothesis, named after the Greek Earth Goddess, is based on the observation that our planet as a whole is homeostatic. Negative feedback loops actively maintain various biosphere parameters within ranges friendly to life, though many mechanisms, like the one regulating the sea's salinity, are still poorly understood. Earth's temperature, for instance, has oscillated within a relatively narrow band for hundreds of millions of years, even though the sun has grown hotter over time. Earth's temperature remains stable enough for life because it actively warms and cools itself, and it warms and cools itself because it is alive. The mechanism whereby such self-regulation arises is no mystery, and indeed boils down to Darwinian selection for dynamic stability. A simulation of a highly simplified Earth-like planet, Lovelock called Daisy World, illustrates how this works. Daisy World has only two species, black daisies and white daisies, both of which have reproductive rates that depend on temperature, a sweet spot at a balmy 72.5 degrees Fahrenheit, declining gradually to zero if the heat is below 41 degrees Fahrenheit or above 104 degrees Fahrenheit. Black daisies warm the planetary surface by absorbing sunlight, while white daisies cool it by reflecting sunlight. Careful mathematical analysis shows that black and white daisies...

---

## What Is Intelligence__ Lessons from AI About Evolution, Computing, and Minds (An - 0008 - Chapter 8

Chapter 2 Survival. Being in time. I hope I have now convinced you that life is inherently computational, though we've only scratched the surface of what it actually computes. The minimal functionality for a dynamically stable life form is, of course, replication or more precisely self-construction. Open-ended evolution requires a von Neumann constructor, which is necessarily also a full-fledged touring machine. The constructor makes it possible to build complex and recursive structures like a tree's branches, or an animal's circulatory system. But the environments in which construction and replication take place look nothing like the pristine grid worlds of von Neumann's cellular automata. The real world is messy, ever-changing, intrusive. To maintain any kind of integrity in such a world, a computational system needs a protective boundary. We've seen how even a virus needs an envelope where it gives up the ability to exist outside its host cell and becomes a transposon. Yet the boundary can't be absolute because life can never be self-sufficient. Computation requires energy, and self-construction requires matter. Outputs are necessary, too, because neither computation nor growth can be perfectly efficient. Computation generates heat, which has to go somewhere. And not every atom that enters a living system can become a functional part of it. Since matter and energy can't be created or destroyed, an organism must therefore shed matter, excretion, and energy, waste heat. Like a vortex, life is a dynamical pattern that can only exist in the flux of a larger environment. The sort of computation we call intelligence, thus arises because of this need for life to interact with its surroundings. Those surroundings invariably include other life forms, opening the door to higher levels of symbiosis, as we'll be discussed later in the book. Here though, we'll explore intelligence at its most basic, in single-player mode. Imagine a simple, single-celled life form, say a bacterium. Its cell membrane separates the self on the inside from the outside world. But as mentioned, the separation can't be total. With pores and ion pumps able to ingest nutrients and excrete wastes, cellular membranes are selectively permeable to matter and energy, just like our bodies. That also makes them permeable to information, because matter and energy aren't generic. A potassium ion isn't interchangeable with a calcium ion, and a red photon isn't the same as an ultraviolet one. These inputs will have different effects on the organism. This, every input is also necessarily a kind of sensor. Given the value of sensory information for an organism's survival, some inputs have evolved to be primarily informational. A receptor may taste a molecule without actually pulling it through the membrane, for example. The point is to gather information. To process that information, a bacterium has something like a brain. It consists of a dynamical network of interacting genes and proteins that are both affected by sensory data and can control cellular processes and behaviors. This biochemical brain also receives inputs from within the cell, such as metabolic status and available energy, allowing internal states like hunger to modulate behavior. Some bacteria can swim using a corkscrew-like bundle of motorized filaments called a flagellum, though steering in the usual sense is impossible. Due to the simplicity of the bacterial body plan, the irrelevance of gravity and the molecular buffeting that characterizes life in water at such small scales, the cell can't distinguish left from right or up from down. When swimming, it can only run, rotating its flagella clockwise to propel itself forward or tumble, running some of its flagellum motors in reverse and causing the cell as a whole to spin chaotically, randomizing its orientation. A classic series of studies by biophysicist Howard Berg and colleagues in the 1970s shows how simply by tumbling more often when food concentration is dropping and less often when it's rising, bacteria on average swim toward places with higher food concentration, a behavior known as chemotaxis. They can use the same approach to swim toward warmth, thermotaxis, or for photosensitive bacteria toward light, photo-taxus. Not that a bacterium can directly measure concentration, temperature, or light level, let alone differences in these properties along its microscopic body length. It's just too small. Relative to every relevant feature of the world it lives in, the bacterium is point-like. One could almost say that it exists only in time, not in space. That is, it experiences life as a sequence of events, and anything it might learn or observe about its spatial environment can only be inferred from that event's sequence. These events are all discrete or digital, even when they relate to continuous physical quantities, such as chemical concentration. Because at bacterial scale, chemicals are only sensed one molecule at a time, as they dock and undock with receptors on the cell membrane. Photon absorption and temperature-dependent chemical events are quantized too. While these discrete events are individually random, the ambient concentration, temperature or illumination determine the rate at which they occur. Hence, a nominally continuous variable like concentration can only be estimated by counting such molecular docking events within a time window, effectively calculating a moving average. If the bacterium is swimming and concentration varies over space, then a statistical trade-off must be made in the estimation process. Computing for longer allows concentration to be estimated more accurately, but at the cost of washing out changes over time, or equivalently, over space. Bacteria are smart about this trade-off, adapting their concentration estimation strategy to the situation. Let's explore how the estimation process works in more detail. Batting average From a bacterium's perspective, chemical concentration is a running estimate of the likelihood of future encounters with a molecule given a history of past encounters with it. In more technical language, if we call the sequence of molecular encounter events x, then the concentration is a time-varying estimate of the probability of x, which can be written as p of x. If this mathematical notation takes you out of your comfort zone, let me try to make it up to you by offering an analogous situation from outside mine, baseball. Here's my naive understanding of the most famous statistic in sports, the batting average. Every time a baseball player is at the plate, they may either succeed, which we could represent as a one, or fail, which we could represent as a zero. Success often involves hitting the ball, but apparently certain ways of hitting it don't count, and other apparent failures, such as the sacrifice fly, are actually not? If I hadn't furtively brought a sci-fi novel to the one baseball game my American relatives dragged me to when we moved to the US, I might have learned these things earlier. Anyway, over time, a player's batting history can be represented as a string of ones and zeros, with a single bit produced every time they're at bat. The proportion of ones, in other words, the average value of all those ones and zeros, is a player's batting average. We can study the data more closely, because baseball nerds have put the complete batting histories of major league baseball players online, going back many decades. Consider Henry Hank Aaron, widely held to be one of the greatest players of all time. During a long career in the major leagues, from 1954 to 1976, Aaron stepped up to the plate over 12,000 times, and 30.5% of the time he successfully hit the ball and got on base, or better. This 0.305 average is considered awesome. No player's performance is constant over time though. It's easy to see this by calculating batting averages for individual seasons, spanning six months every year from April through September. Now we can see that over the first few years of Aaron's career, his batting average went up, peaking at over 350 in 1959. Like anything else, baseball has a learning curve. But alas, bodies age, and small injuries accumulate. His performance declined, first gradually, then more sharply. By the end of his career, he was batting below 250. By that point, he was going up to bat only half as often. He slowed down because the manager was keeping a close eye on batting averages, and as Aaron's declined, he was increasingly sidelined. We've gone from considering career averages to six-month season averages, but nothing prevents us from averaging over shorter windows, three months, two months, or even single months. This finer-grained analysis brings new information into view up to a point. Using three-month windows, we can see that Aaron reached his career peak just a few years before retiring, averaging an amazing 378 between July and September of 1973. He finished that year with 713 home runs, just one behind the world record set in 1935 by Babe Ruth. Thousands of letters to Aaron poured in, some from fans, others filled with hate and death threats from those appalled at the prospect of a black man, breaking baseball's most sacred record. Still, over time, not only had Aaron's season average declined, his performance had also become more uneven. So while the highs remained high, they were interspersed with lower and more unpredictable lows. Hence, a short averaging window that would have been highly predictive early in Aaron's career would have shed less light on the future later on. Part of the effect is simply due to lack of data. When we average over shorter intervals, or Aaron goes to bad less often, the estimate becomes noisier because there are fewer bits to average. In the limit, if our window shrank all the way to a single at-bat, the average could only assume two values, 0 or 1, making it useless as a predictor of future performance. Clearly then, there's an ideal size of averaging window, large enough to accumulate decent statistics, but small enough to register changes over time. The ideal window size will depend not only on the rate of at-bats, but also on how often a hit occurs and on how consistent the player is. All of this is to say, if X is a sequence of discrete events in the past, whether hits for a baseball player or food molecule encounters for a bacterium, P of X smooths those discrete events into a continuously varying average rate using an appropriately sized averaging window, which is also an estimate of the likelihood of encountering such an event in the immediate future. Although this quantity is a description of the past, it's a predictive model. If no events have occurred for a while, the likelihood is low. If a flurry of events just started, the likelihood is high. If the rate has been increasing, then a good estimate will be higher than the historical average, and if the rate has been decreasing, a good estimate will be lower. So, are batting averages real? It's obvious that Hank Aaron's batting average wasn't a measurement of some physical quantity out in the world, or in his body or mind, though neither was it unconstrained by the physics of balls and bats, the psychology of pictures, or the physiology of aging bodies. It didn't have any one true value, either, in that it could be estimated in many ways and on many timescales, though some estimates are better than others in the sense of being more predictive. Despite their fuzziness, though, batting averages matter to players, managers, and fans alike because they both predict and affect the future. The same applies to the kind of statistical measurements that matter to bacteria. Like billiard balls, molecules are discrete objects, subject to microscopic physical laws that don't in any way involve or require macroscopic concepts like concentration or temperature. But if a bacterium needs to predict its likelihood of encountering food, it must estimate concentration based on recorded events, not unlike baseball hits. As described in chapter 1, Boltzmann's development of thermodynamics, the ideal gas law, for instance, defines quantities like pressure, temperature, and concentration using mathematical models and approximations of the same kind. These two involve counting molecules or events within a time window or spatial box. Instruments like thermometers or pH strips do the same using an experimental apparatus rather than theory, so does a digital camera by counting the photons absorbed by each pixel. In short, just like batting averages, variables like brightness, temperature, pH, and concentration rely on models. The ways of predicting future phenomena using past statistics. No things in themselves. We can either conclude that properties like temperature are not real, a path that ultimately leads to the solid-sistic denial that anything is real, or we can reappress what it means for something to be real. Outside pure math, reality can seldom be fully pinned down. We've seen how a concept like temperature falls apart when we ask about how hot or cold a medium is as its pressure or density drops towards zero, where averaging is no longer reliable. So if we're asked a question like, what is the temperature of outer space? We should counter with more questions to answer meaningfully. Is this about calculating how hot a satellites solar panel will get? Answer it depends entirely on which way it's pointed relative to the closest star, and on the shadows of any nearby moons or planets. Is it about determining how comfortable your hand will feel if exposed to outer space? Answer, don't do it. For a bacterium adapted to a watery medium, these simply aren't relevant questions. One might as well ask a person, how does a neutron star taste? The philosopher Immanuel Kant sought to distinguish an objective reality from our inevitably subjective or phenomenal experience of it. In describing objective reality, he used the phrase, ding an siq, or thing in itself. Like taste, temperature is not a thing in itself. It doesn't pre-exist somehow in an unobserved universe. It is, rather, an observer-dependent model whose usefulness, from the observer's viewpoint, depends on its behaviorally relevant predictive power. This is true not only of temperature, but of all the macroscopic phenomena we care about and describe using language, like musical note, chair, bacterium, or person. It may even be true of phenomena like an electron, but here we run into limits in our understanding of the universe's fundamental laws. Electron may merely be the name we assign to a certain kind of propagating disturbance in a quantum field, or it may have some more fundamentally digital nature that physicists investigating the sub-basement of reality could one day discover. And our quantum fields themselves, real? Who knows? Whether electrons, photons, quarks, and the various associated elementary forces are real and are observer-independent things in themselves, higher order objects or features like temperature, pressure, chairs and tables, bacteria and people seem at first blush to be mere ideas or epithelmina. The unobserved universe doesn't care about such ideas. After all, the continued existence of a chair doesn't depend on whether someone is around to conceive of that bunch of atoms as chair. Atoms everywhere are governed by the unthinking laws of physics. The mathematician John Conway's Game of Life offers a useful illustration. It's not really a game in that there are no players, no score, no winning or losing. It's just a set of rules that describe, given the state of the game board, what its next state will be. This should sound familiar. Conway's life is, in fact, the most famous example of a cellular automaton, though von Neumann didn't live to see it. The rules are simple. One, like pixels or graph paper, the world consists of a grid of square cells. Two, each cell can be alive or dead. We can visualize these states by coloring them black, alive or white, dead. Three, at every time step, the state of each cell is determined by the state of that cell and its eight neighbors during the previous time step. Four, if the cell is alive, then it stays alive only if it has either two or three live neighbors. Five, if the cell is dead, then it springs to life if it has exactly three live neighbors. Under these rules, an entirely dead board will remain dead forever. That is a so-called fixed point or steady state solution. As you can easily confirm with pen and paper, a two-by-two block of live cells on an otherwise dead board is also a steady state. Conway and others have discovered that life's simple physics can produce many interesting higher-level phenomena too. For instance, certain configurations of five live neighboring cells form a stable, four-state cyclic pattern that appears to move diagonally through space called a glider. A more complex configuration of cells forms a glider gun in which a piston-like reciprocating mechanism pumps out an endless stream of gliders. In the game of life, one can build a lot of complex machines using a few simple ingredients like gliders and glider guns. In fact, it has been proven that, like von Neumann's original cellular automata, life is touring complete. Despite its simplicity, an enterprising engineer can create a general-purpose computer in life. In a particularly striking feat of recursive nerddom, the computations required to simulate life have even been programmed in life. This has to be seen to be believed. It follows that the seemingly trivial universe of life could carry out arbitrarily complex computations, including perhaps a simulation of our entire universe. Once a system can compute, its underlying physics become irrelevant to that computation. Remember that, per-turing, all computers are equivalent. Therefore, it's just as valid to say that the computation doesn't care about the physics as to say that the physics doesn't care about the computation. This will matter to us later on as it allows us to understand functionality in a living or intelligent system without needing to understand its underlying mechanism. A die-hard physicist, though, can justifiably insist that neither gliders, nor any of the infinitely complex things one can build in life are real or things in themselves, in the sense that the rules of life don't involve any such objects. There are only dead and live cells, and the elementary rules for determining their next states. These facts, and these facts alone, comprise life's theory of everything. Being further is in the eye of the beholder. As beholders, though, we can certainly see gliders, they appear to be real enough. What do we mean by this? We mean that, if we recognize a glider configuration, we can immediately predict what will happen next. It will cycle through four states and move diagonally until it encounters an obstacle. If the glider were the only thing on an otherwise empty, infinite board, we could, with a single glance, predict every future state of the entire board for all time. Compared to brute force computation of the future state of every cell on the board, the effort saved is, well, infinite. We could say then that gliders are real only and precisely because, as a concept or model, they are useful for predicting the future whenever the glider pattern arises. Recognizing an understanding gliders allows simulation without simulation. Furthermore, the glider pattern is highly relevant in the life universe, because the pattern is so simple that it tends to arise spontaneously. Meaning, if we imagine life being played out on a large board where cells occasionally flip at random, gliders will form frequently. And when they do, we will immediately be able to predict their future trajectory, until and unless they are disrupted by noise or by running into something. Anthropic principle. Some mathematicians point of view, patterns like the glider and glider gun are special in that they correspond to limit cycles. Generalizations of the idea of steady states, like the 2x2 block, to endlessly repeating loops of states. According to quantum field theory, the patterns we call electrons, photons, and quarks are much like gliders. Stable, though oscillating, solutions to underlying field equations that don't explicitly define such objects. This too should sound familiar. We've just encountered dynamic stability again. Seen this way, gliders and elementary particles are simply the earliest steps in an evolutionary process, according to the maxim that whatever persists exists, and conversely whatever is too dynamically unstable to persist, doesn't. Evolution doesn't have to stop there. If eight gliders collide in just the right way, they will react to form a glider gun. And not only is a glider gun stable, it also creates more gliders. Glider guns and a few other simple objects that can arise through glider collisions are the basic ingredients for building a touring machine. Could Conway's life lead to a biogenesis, just as BFF does? In our universe, that route involved primordial fields coalescing into elementary particles, electrons and protons coalescing into hydrogen atoms, the condensation of stars, the creation of increasingly heavy atoms through fusion, the formation of planets, and the subsequent events described at the beginning of chapter 1. This may offer a solution to the age-old puzzle of why our universe seems to be so finely tuned for complex life to arise. As physicist Stephen Hawking wrote in a brief history of time, the laws of science contain many fundamental numbers like the size of the electric charge of the electron and the ratio of the masses of the proton and the electron. The remarkable fact is that the values of these numbers seem to have been very finely adjusted to make possible the development of life. For Hawking and many others in the physics community, our very existence is thus evidence that many universes exist, for if there were only one, its compatibility with life would be a miracle, and physicists don't believe in miracles. In a multiverse where the laws of physics vary between universes, the observation that our universe seems finely tuned to support our existence would simply be due to an observer bias known as the anthropic principle. Of course the universe we happen to observe is finely tuned for life because nobody could be around to observe the vastly greater number of sterile universes. It would be as absurd to claim that we're lucky to live in this universe as it would be to claim that we're lucky to live here on earth and not on Mars or inside the sun or in interstellar space, in short in any of the vast number of places in the cosmos inhospitable to life. This so-called weak anthropic principle is certainly correct. There are no poor unlucky people on Mars because no people are on Mars period. It is, however, quite a leap to go from a puzzling observation about the life-friendly fine-tuning of physical laws to the strong anthropic principle holding that any and all conceivable laws of physics must hold somewhere. Physicists should be uncomfortable with miracles, but many are equally uncomfortable with a multiverse where any and all laws exist. Is this really required to account for our own existence? A more economical explanation is that the fundamental rules of our universe, like those of BFF and Conway's life, allow for computation, which is a much lower bar than allowing for life as we know it. By creating a numbering system that can enumerate all possible cellular automata, mathematician Stephen Wolfram and collaborators have started to explore the question of how unusual computation is in absolute terms. Rule number 110 has been proven to support computation, and many of the first hundred or so rules are so trivial that they create no meaningful dynamics at all. Observations like this and the simplicity of Conway's life suggest that a universe doesn't need to be fine-tuned to support computation. So multiple universes may or may not exist, but either way, perhaps ours is not so special. In a noise source, the simple logic of dynamic stability will select for stable entities, which can then start to combine into progressively higher order dynamically stable entities, quarks into nucleons, electrons and nucleons into atoms, atoms into molecules, and so on. Entities like these can be understood as proto-replicators subject to the tendency toward increasing complexification and computation described in chapter 1. If the rules had been different, the proto-replicators would be different, and life's software would have ended up on a different computational substrate. Perhaps quarks and electrons weren't the only viable option. Indeed, even with the same rules, each evolutionary stage offers an expanding menu of possibilities. DNA isn't the only possible information carrier, nor are amino acids the only possible LEGO bricks for protein-like molecules. There's certainly no reason all life on Earth should rely exclusively on right-handed sugars, as opposed to their mirror image versions, the left-handed sugars. Regardless of such just-so choices, the end result would be the same, replication, computation, and life. Darwin may have been right in yet another way then, when he wrote of a biogenesis that one might as well think of origin of matter. He was being facetious, but why not? Matter might have evolved, too. The Umwelton Within In describing Conway's life, we've allowed ourselves a third person God's eye view of a toy universe. But let's now return to the bacterium living in our own world, point-like relative to its vast watery environment, yet on the inside full of complex molecular machinery, technically brainless, but not unintelligent. We've seen that the bacterial brain implements an adaptive algorithm for estimating chemical concentration as it swims, and it seems natural to call this measurement purposeive, since it certainly looks like the goal is to eat and to avoid toxins, in short, to survive. I've argued that the very notion of concentration is something the bacterium appears to construct in the service of that purpose. The whole concentration is, to use pioneering biologist Jakob von Uckskol's word, part of the bacterium's Umwelton, its universe of the meaningful. Later, we'll explore how the powerful social aspects of predictive models affect the future, but for now, let's stick to single-player mode. It's not hard to see why a bacterium would care about its batting average, the rate at which it encounters molecules it can eat. How much that rate can vary, and how low it can go, will of course depend on how depleted its reserves are. That's why part of the bacterium's Umwelton is also its internal state. Let's call that state H for hidden. In general, H includes a comfort zone, surrounded by a danger zone, beyond the danger zone lies death. In the simplest case, if we suppose that H represents the amount of available food inside the cell, estimating the healthometer, P of H, would look like the same kind of smoothing process as that used to estimate P of X, but now based on discrete internal metabolic events H, rather than measurements of the external environment X. An organism's job number one is to keep its internal estimate of P of H in the comfort zone. This is homeostasis. The bacterium does this via actions, which we could also represent as a set of discrete motor events, O, for output. These actions may be visible from outside, such as reversing the flagella to tumble, or they may be internal, such as turning on or off a gene or metabolic pathway. Incidentally, plants and fungi, life forms that lack muscles, and so only move very slowly, should not be understood as passive. In the contrary, as the scientists who study them are increasingly appreciating, they compensate for relative immobility with the ability to take an extraordinary variety of chemical actions. In any case, homeostasis involves performing actions O given external observations X that maintain H within the comfort zone. This is intelligence in its most rudimentary form. It's common to suppose that something like reinforcement learning is at work here, allowing the organism to learn to perform any needed actions based on feedback that can be positive, feeling more comfortable, or negative, feeling less comfortable. However, the whole idea of grounding the emergence of intelligence in reinforcement learning, or supervised learning of any kind, implies an oracle that can administer rewards and punishments or give correct answers. Where did this oracle come from? How did it become intelligent? Maybe there is no such oracle. It's simpler and more general to think about the evolution of intelligent behavior as arising from unsupervised learning, or as it's sometimes called now self-supervised learning, of the combined or joint probability P of X, H and O. Bacterial populations that learn this joint probability distribution will not only know how to estimate nutrient concentration and their own internal state, but also within some operating envelope, know what the consequences would be of acting in various ways under different internal and external circumstances. Critically, this joint distribution is a prediction of self as well as environment, and of the consequences for oneself of various possible actions. The joint distribution includes all of the following knowledge. How to tell if you are hungry. How to measure food concentration. How your next actions are likely to affect future food concentration, and how much less hungry you will be when you get that food. Thus the joint distribution contains everything one might want to know about how to behave to stay alive, at least with respect to food. There's no need to use scare quotes around no or knowledge. One might use them for two reasons. One reason is deep and the other less so. The deep reason has to do with the distinction between a passive abstract model and a real agent whose predictions include actions that it takes and that determine the future. I'll discuss this in more detail shortly. But first let's dispense with the shallower reason for scare quotes. The distinction many cognitive scientists draw between knowledge and competence. The phrase competence without comprehension has often been used to describe the way an agent can act as if it has knowledge without apparently having that knowledge. Never mind bacteria, human baseball players or race car drivers have amazing physical intuition in their domain of expertise. Yet most baseball players wouldn't be able to explain or reason about parabolic trajectories in general. And most race car drivers don't know the equations for friction or centripetal force. So do they know physics or not. This sounds like a more profound question than it really is. Math, physics and for that matter, the ability to explain things using language are all skills or competencies in their own right. None of them follows from learning how to swing bats, catch balls or drive race cars, or vice versa. Plenty of nerds know physics well enough but are so clueless about sports that they may need to look up what batting average means on Wikipedia. Thank you Wikipedia. And of course symbolic math and language are far out of reach for an agent with the very limited computational capacity of a bacterium, even when such an agent's learned competencies approach mathematical perfection in some practical domain. As we'll see when we explore large language models in chapter 8, symbolic skills and capabilities like language and math can also be fully represented as joint probability distributions, albeit enormous complicated ones. Most of us who both know physics and have an intuitive understanding of how to drive or swing a bat don't connect the two domains much. But for some people, mathematical thinking and those physical intuitions might be closely associated, just as the sound of a voice and the motion of a speaker's lips are. Either way, it's all in the big overall joint distribution, P of X, H and O. Latent variables. Learning P of X, H and O efficiently, that is successfully representing it without exhaustively memorizing the probability of every individual combination of circumstance, state and action, requires data compression. Without such compression, the size of the model, even for a simple organism like a bacterium, would be unwieldy. Learning the model would therefore be very hard and storing it or evaluating it would be expensive. As we've seen, data compression involves finding patterns in data and factoring them out. For symbolic data, which are usually compressed losslessly by algorithms like those used for zipping files, such patterns generally take the form of repeated sequences. When the data are instead continuous and the compression is lossy, like that of MP3 audio or a JPEG image, finding those patterns allows irrelevant details to be ignored, exposing a smaller number of meaningful latent variables. For the bacterium, the concentrations of molecules that bind to receptors are important latent variables. To see why, imagine the bacterium has 100 receptors that bind to some chemical of interest, like Aspartate, for E. coli, that's a yum. Each receptor can be occupied or unoccupied by an Aspartate molecule. Let's suppose I'm just making up numbers here, that occupancy is measured in millions of a second, and the bacterium encounters between 0 and 1000 Aspartate molecules per second as it swims. Since the state of each receptor can be thought of as a binary digit, 0 for unoccupied and 1 for occupied, these 100 receptors produce a raw information stream that amounts to a hundred million bits of information per second. That's a lot of bits per second, around 10 times what it takes to transmit 4K video. Luckily for a bacterium's little brain, the overwhelming majority of this information is either useless or redundant. Since the cell is so small, and there are no meaningful concentration differences along its length, it doesn't matter which receptors are occupied, the receptors are symmetric, making any meaning extractable from them invariant to this symmetry. Although we might as well just add all of these bits together. Even when added up, the total is almost sure to be either 0 or 1 at any given time, because the occupancy time is short and the concentration is low. That means we're already down to a mere 1 million bits per second. Then when we consider that the exact timing of the docking events doesn't matter, meaning that there is local time symmetry or invariance to the precise timing of the docking events, we realize that we can just add up all of the ones each second, giving us concentration as an average occupancy rate over a 1 second time window. So we're back to averaging over a time window, as for calculating a batting average. That single number per second, which can be represented with only a few bits, accounts for the great majority of the real information coming in through those hundred receptors. Though a little more information can be squeezed out by making the averaging window adaptive, as mentioned earlier. Evolution will have honed in on something close to this compression scheme, because it serves the useful information out and discards everything else. Such compression makes the overall distribution p of x, h and o learnable, because the patterns relating x to h and o can only be generalized if the welter of irrelevant detail in x has been cleared away. In the language of information theory, the useful parts of x are the signal, while the discarded parts are the noise. Remember, this signal is useful precisely because it's a continuous estimate of the likelihood of a future docking event. Though note that this continuous estimate is itself represented as discrete, stochastic signaling events within the cell, so in calling it a continuous number, we're doing some modeling of the model. But we're getting ahead of ourselves. More importantly, we've arrived at a practical definition of chemical concentration simply by thinking about what is relevant to the bacterium's future given its past. Concentration is real because it's predictive. Just as the temperature of an oven is real for you, because knowing it will allow you to predict whether your food will cook in there, or your finger will burn if you touch it. Hunger is much the same. Just as the exact sequence of molecular encounters that led to a given estimate of the concentration is irrelevant, the exact sequence of energy-consuming actions that led to a depleted energy state is irrelevant. What matters is that death will occur without more food. Hence, hunger is real in exactly the same sense and for the same reason that concentration is real. Both are useful latent variables for efficiently modeling p of x, h, and o. That one of these latent variables is an estimate of conditions outside the cell, while the other is an estimate of conditions inside the cell will become interesting as we consider social relationships between cells. But for our solitary bacterium making its way in the world, there is no difference. Modeling So far, I've argued that modeling a single joint probability distribution, p of x, h, and o, is enough to establish the reality of both regular features of the external world, like temperature concentration and brightness, and of the internal life of an organism, like hunger. I haven't explained how such models arise or why organisms with models appear to be purposeive. I've also been deliberately vague about the word model, shifting its usage back and forth between noun and verb. As a noun, we often think of a model as something disembodied, perhaps an algorithm or set of equations represented in abstract form. A one-dimensional linear model, for example, can be written f of x equals w times x, and is fully specified by the single number w. The billions of parameters in a large machine-learned model are no different. They just take much more space to write down. As a verb, modeling may mean learning or approximating w from training data, or it might mean evaluating the resulting model, that is actually calculating f of x for a given x. A living organism is clearly more verb than noun. Verbness, or to use a more resonant term, agency, is precisely what distinguishes living things from dead things. Living things do stuff of their own accord, non-living things don't. A bunch of parameters printed out on a giant rim of paper and shoved into a closet never to be seen again are certainly not a living thing. They are just inert matter, dead information, much like the reams of DNA still coiled inside the cells of an animal after it has died. Even to call those numbers information may be overstating the case. Since if no reader exists, no active process making use of those printed numbers to do something, they might as well be gibberish or blank. It would make no difference. And information is, as the anthropologist and philosopher Gregory Bateson memorably put it, a difference that makes a difference. The noun and verb senses of model differ from each other in much the same way a mathematicians definition of the word function differs from that of a practical programmer. For a mathematician a function is an abstraction. It could be unknowable in practice, like the oddness or evenness of the number of pennies in circulation at any given moment or even fundamentally non-computable, like whether an arbitrary mathematical statement is correct. Interesting as they may be in theory for a programmer such functions are nonsense. Programmers only care about functions that can be implemented by running actual code that can function or that if buggy failed to function. Relatedly, remember that the O in P of X, H and O stands for output. Life must act yet another word for function. A living thing is a process, not a printout or a mathematical abstraction. So these actions have to be taken or the process is disconnected from the world and causally speaking the model may as well not exist. In the so-called auto regressive sequence prediction setting used by many unsupervised AI models today, the action with maximum probability according to P of X, H and O is generally taken. At the next moment in time, the action taken along with any new observations of X and H becomes part of the past and the model is evaluated again. Hence every action depends not only on past observations but also on past actions. An organism is therefore modeling itself jointly with the environment and in so doing is carrying out a genital or verbish modeling. It's running its own program in a continuous loop. I've described the program as a probability distribution rather than in the more obvious way a programmer might as a deterministic function mapping input to output for two reasons. First, as we've seen, biological computing is stochastic so actions need to be thought about in terms of probabilities, not certainties. That's true of AI models too. With non-zero temperature, as generally used in chatbots, the action taken is drawn from a probability distribution rather than being fully determined by the inputs. Second, those actions are not just outputs but also inputs at the next moment in time. A strange loop is at work here. Because the model is joint, all senses are active. Not only do actions taken depend on interior and exterior percepts but all percepts also depend on actions. In our chemotaxis example, for instance, any perceived change in nutrient concentration and its interpretation, will depend on whether the bacterium is swimming forward or tumbling in place, which itself depends on perceived nutrient concentration. Further, the model is always modeling itself in the sense that it predicts its own future states and actions in addition to predicting its environment. We could even say that it predicts its own predictions in a kind of infinite regress. Life is a hall of mirrors. Learning by evolving The active modeling described earlier seems to leave no room for learning, only for doing or in mathematical language function evaluation. But where does the function constantly being evaluated, P of X H and O, come from in the first place? This question sounds a lot like the puzzle of a biogenesis and that's no coincidence. As far back as 1948, Turing realized that evolution could be understood as a trial and error learning process. It may seem crude and inefficient, but it is the necessary bootstrap to any more sophisticated kind of learning. Everything that learns, either learns to learn by evolving or was designed by entities so far human, who themselves learns to learn by evolving. Suppose we have a world in which bacteria have already somehow arisen, and that if they survive to do so, they can reproduce, in the process cloning their P of X H and O models to pass on to daughter cells. We are assuming, in other words, that P of X H and O is encoded genetically. After all, if P of X H and O is a computable function, it can be implemented with code, and since the bacterium is a self-reproducing automaton, as von Neumann described, it already comes with a universal Turing machine in the box. The bacterium's computing resources will be limited, and certain functions will be easier to express on that biological platform than others, but any kind of computation is theoretically possible. By virtue of being genetically encoded, the code is also open-endedly evolveable. Not only can it improve the atidious, old-fashioned million monkeys on a million typewriters' point mutation, it can improve far more efficiently through symbiosis, as described in chapter 1. Maybe then evolution in its full self-modifying glory isn't such a slow learning algorithm. So what makes for a fitter P of X H and O? One short, one that is more dynamically stable. As a first approximation, one, if a high probability is assigned to being dead, that is to H going beyond the danger zone and into the dead zone, then in a self-fulfilling way, the model will predict and take actions that result in its own death. However, a fitter model will not suicide. It will assign the highest probabilities to the comfort zone with declining probabilities outside this zone. 2. If the model isn't accurate, consistent, or suitably general, failing to predict death or to account for the relationships between actions and states or its own future actions, including under novel conditions, then it will be less fit than a model that is accurate, consistent, and general, hence good at avoiding states leading to death. 3. If signals are available, whether internal, H, or external, X, that can help with the above predictions, then a model able to avail itself of these signals will be fitter than a model lacking them. 4. Since modeling the verb is computationally costly, hence energetically costly, a smaller, leaner model that predicts the future just as well as a bigger one will win, because it will starve less often and leave more resources available for reproduction. 5. As a bonus, model compression tends to go hand in hand with generality, meaning that all things being equal, a leaner model is also more likely to continue to perform well under novel conditions. This is just an alternative formulation of Occam's razor, which holds that all things being equal, a simpler explanation is more likely to be true than a complicated one. In a resource constrained environment, then organisms with incrementally better models will outcompete those with worse models, and over many generations, the modeling will become very good indeed. 5. Cause by effect The term good applied to a model can be interpreted in multiple ways. For data scientists, a good model usually means one with a low error rate on held out test data, or that otherwise performs well on some predefined task. This measure of goodness applies to a model, the noun, as opposed to a dynamic agent that models the verb. Doing goodness does involve computational evaluation, that is resetting the model and bringing it to life very briefly, and many times, computing its response to test stimuli. But generally, no notion of time or agency exists in such an artificial setting, and goodness is whatever the data scientist says it is. This is the highly artificial setting of supervised learning. On the other hand, a model that is good in evolutionary terms is one that works, or at least works well enough, meaning that it effectively predicts the future. In doing so, essentially, it tends to bring that future about, a self-fulfilling paradox of backward causality. The apparent paradox arises because causes are supposed to precede their effects. How could it ever be right to say that something happens because of its effect? Yet, colloquially, we do this all the time. I use, for instance, that I'm talking with a friend at the coffee shop, then glance at the clock, jump up, and race out the door, my coffee unfinished. A busybody at the next table wonders why I'm madly careening off on my bike. My friend says, oh, it's just because he's running late to the office again. This is an utterly unremarkable exchange, but if you think about it, quite a strange use of the word because. If a boulder is careening down a hillside about to squash a parked car and someone asks why the boulder is doing that, there might be all kinds of answers. Maybe a landslide occurred higher up or it broke off a cliff? We don't say it's careening down the hill because there's a parked car down at the bottom. The causes are uphill in the past and effects are downhill in the future. In this light, an effect preceding its own cause seems nonsensical. Yet, when it comes to bacteria, people, and everything in between, the future or a wishful model of it, one in which you are safe, warm, well fed, caffeinated, and make it to the office just in time, seems to influence the events leading up to it rather than those events inexorably determining the future. In fact, evolutionarily speaking, only creatures with models that successfully predict their own future even have a future. Of course, none of this happens in violation of the laws of physics, but, like life itself, per-shrodinger, it certainly looks suspicious. In a deterministic universe, how could a plan or intention possibly affect what will just happen? If you're thinking that this sounds a lot like the paradox of free will, yes, it does. We'll get to that in Chapter 6. The answer comes from that strange loop inherent to auto-regressive sequence modeling. We've seen why the evolution of life implies the evolution of a sufficiently good model. That model gives rise to actions in the world, but the world also gives rise to the model. While the model can only have learned from the past, it is a model because it can predict the future. When that prediction informs its actions, we get something that looks like backward causality. The more powerful the model, or we could say the more intelligent, the more pronounced this effect will be. Cognitive scientist Terence Deacon calls systems exhibiting apparent backward causality and intentional. We could equally call them Agential, Purposeive, or in a broad sense, Alive. Hence, for the boulder rolling downhill, the car at the bottom could only enter into the Y of things if someone or something rolled that boulder on purpose. At this point, we've considered two senses in which a model can be called Good. For a data scientist, a model is good to the degree that it scores well on a test. For a living organism, a model is good to the degree that it successfully predicts the future of the world, of the self, and of the effects of one's actions on self and world. A third sense of good connecting these two is normative as opposed to descriptive. A model is good if it keeps the organism alive because being alive is good and being dead is bad. Notice that this normative quality arises in the evolutionary setting without anything like reinforcement learning, wherein an external oracle or teacher meets out rewards and punishments. In fact, punishment of an individual organism under Darwinian conditions is impossible since the only negative feedback is death which will prevent any subsequent learning. Rather, a taste for a liveness emerges from something like a totology. Dead things don't model, alive things do, their models successfully predict their own aliveness. Ergo, it is good. Goodness and truth. While death itself is nothingness, states adjacent to death will be aversive to any creature that has evolved with death acting as what physicists call an absorbing boundary condition. Being averse to death in other words is how not to die. Aversion results in actions that are likely to move the creature away from a bad state and toward a better one more conducive to survival. This normative judgment and the response to it are the same for a bacterium swimming away from a toxic chemical, a beetle fleeing a stomping foot, a rabbit evading a wolf, or a human refugee escaping a civil war. As we'll explore in chapter 4, animals need to internalize this kind of normative signaling the moment they become multicellular. They do so using ancient neuromodulatory chemicals like dopamine and serotonin, which first evolved in flatworms and remained the basis of our own most elemental feelings, such as desire and satiety. With our big brains and complex cultures, human ideas about what is good or bad have become manyfold and nuanced, but they all trace back to these evolutionary fundamentals. An account of modeling in general as normative, foundational to life and arising from computation in living systems troubles some still influential ideas in Western philosophy. One is David Humes is art distinction, which seeks to distinguish descriptive from normative statements. Hume privileged to description, which was a progressive idea at the time. He held that descriptive statements ought to take precedence over normative judgments, to precede them, or we wouldn't find it so irritating when people...

---

